
A DICTIONARY OF ENGLISH ETYMOLOGY.

BY HENSLEIGH WEDGWOOD,
LATE FELLOW OF CHR. COLL. CAM.
Second Edition,
THOROUGHLY REVISED AND ENLARGED;
WITH AN INTRODUCTION ON THE ORIGIN OF LANGUAGE.

LONDON: TRÜBNER & CO., 8 & 60, PATERNOSTER ROW.
1872.

INTRODUCTION.
ON THE ORIGIN OF LANGUAGE.

It requires only a superficial acquaintance with the principal languages of Europe to recognise their division into four or five main classes, each comprising a number of subordinate dialects, which have so much in common in their stock of words and in their grammatical structure, as irresistibly to impress us with the conviction that the peoples by whom they are spoken, are the progeny, with more or less mixture of foreign elements, of a common ancestry. If we compare German and Dutch, for instance, or Danish and Swedish, it is impossible in either case to doubt that the people speaking the pair of languages are a cognate race; that there was a time more or less remote when the ancestors of the Swabians and the Hollanders, or of the Danes and Swedes, were comprised among a people speaking a common language. The relation between Danish and Swedish is of the closest kind, that between Dutch and German a more distant one, and we cannot fail to recognise a similar relationship, though of more remote an origin, between the Scandinavian dialects, on the one hand, and the Teutonic, on the other,—the two together forming what is called the Germanic class of Languages. A like gradation of resemblance is found in the other classes. The Welsh, Cornish, and Breton, like the Danish and Swedish, have the appearance of descent from a common parentage at no very distant period, and the same is true of Gaelic and Manx. On the other hand, there is a greater difference between Gaelic and Welsh than there is between any of the branches of the Germanic class; while, at the same time, there are peculiarities of grammatical structure common to both, and so much identity traceable in the roots of the language, as to leave no hesitation in classing them as branches of a common Celtic stock. And so in the Slavonic class, Polish and Czech or Bohemian, as Russian and Servian, are sister languages, while the difference between Russian and Polish is so great as to argue a much longer separation of the national life.

In the case of the Romance languages we know historically that the countries where Italian, Provençal, French, Spanish, &c., are spoken, were thoroughly colonised by the Romans, and were for centuries under subjection to the empire. We accordingly regard the foregoing class of languages as descended from Latin, the language of the Imperial Government, and we account for their divergences, not so much from the comparative length of their separate duration, as from mixture with the speech of the subject nations who formed the body of the people in the different provinces.

With Latin and the other Italic languages, Umbrian and Oscan, of which slight remains have come down to us, must be reckoned Greek and Albanian, as members of a family ranking with the Germanic, the Celtic, and Slavonic stocks, although there has not been occasion to designate the group by a collective name. When we extend our survey to Sanscrit and Zend, the ancient languages of India and Persia, we find the same evidences of relationship in the fundamental part of the words, as well as the grammatical structure of the language, which led us to regard the great families of European speech as descendants of a common stock.

Throughout the whole of this vast circle the names of the numerals unmistakeably graduate into each other; however startling the dissimilarity may be in particular cases, where the name of a number in one language is compared with the corresponding form in another, as when we compare five and quinque, four and tessera, seven and hepta. The names of the simplest blood relations, as father, mother, brother, sister, are equally universal. Many of the pronouns, the prepositions and particles of abstract signification, as well as words designating the most familiar objects and actions of ordinary life, are part of the common property.

Thus step by step has been attained the conviction that the principal races of Europe and of India are all descended from a single people, who had already attained a considerable degree of civilisation, and spoke a language of grammatical structure similar to that of their descendants. From this primeval tribe it is supposed that colonies branched off in different directions, and becoming isolated in their new settlements, grew up into separate peoples, speaking dialects assuming more and more distinctly their own peculiar features, until they gradually developed in the form of Zend and Sanscrit and the different classes of European speech.

The light which is thus thrown on the pedigree and relationship of races beyond the reach of history is however only an incidental result of linguistic study. For language, the machinery and vehicle of thought, and indispensable condition of all mental progress, holds out to the rational inquirer a subject of as high an intrinsic interest as that which Geology finds in the structure of the Globe, or Astronomy in the movements of the heavenly bodies.

Etymology embraces every question concerning the structure of words. It resolves them into their constituent elements, traces their growth and relationships, examines the changes they undergo in their use by successive generations of men, or in the mixture of speech brought about by the vicissitudes of war or of peaceful intercourse, and seeks in every way to elucidate the course by which the words of a language have come to signify the meaning which they suggest to a native ear.

The first step that must be taken in the analysis of a word, is to distinguish the part which contains the fundamental significance, from the grammatical elements used to modify that significance in a regular way, such as the inflections of verbs and of nouns, the terminations which give an abstract or an adjectival or diminutival sense to the word, or any similar contrivances in habitual use in the language. It will be convenient to lay aside for separate consideration these grammatical adjuncts, and to confine our attention, in the first place, to the radical portion of the word. If we take the word Enmity, for example, we recognise the termination ty as the sign of an abstract noun, and we understand the word as signifying the state or condition of an enemy, which is felt as the immediate parent of the English word. Now we know that enemy comes to us through the French ennemi from Latin inimicus, which may itself be regularly resolved into the prefix in (equivalent to our un), implying negation or opposition, and amicus, a friend. In amicus, again, we distinguish the syllable -us as the sign of a noun in the nominative case; -ic- as an element equivalent to the German -ig or English -y in windy, hairy, &c., as an adjective termination indicating possession or connection with; and finally the radical element am, signifying love, which is presented in the simplest form in the verb amo, I love.

Here our power of analysis is brought to a close, nor would it advance our knowledge of the structure of language by a single step, if it could be shown that the syllable am was a Sanscrit root as well as a Latin one. It would merely be one more proof of a primitive connection between the Latin and the Indian races, but the same problem would remain in either case, how the syllable am could be connected with the thought of love. Thus sooner or later the Etymologist is brought to the question of the origin of Language. The scientific account of any particular word will only be complete when it is understood how the root to which the word has been traced could have acquired its proper significance among the founders of Language. The speech of man in his mother tongue is not, among children of the present day, a spontaneous growth of nature.

The expression itself of mother-tongue shows the immediate source from whence the language of each of us is derived. The child learns to speak from the intercourse of those in whose care he is placed. If an English infant were removed from its parents and committed to the charge of a Greek or a Turkish home, he would be troubled by no instinctive smatterings of English, but would grow up in the same command of Greek or of Turkish as his foster brothers.

Thus language, like writing, is an art handed down from one generation to another, and when we would trace upwards to its origin the pedigree of this grand distinction between man and the brute creation, we must either suppose that the line of tradition has been absolutely endless, that there never was a period at which the family of man was not to be found on earth, speaking a language bebequeathed to them by his ancestors, or we must at last arrive at a generation who was not taught their language by their parents. The question then arises, how did the generation, in which language was originally developed, attain so valuable an art? Must we suppose that our first parents were supernaturally endowed with the power of speaking and understanding a definite language, which was transmitted in natural course to their descendants, and was variously modified in different lines of descent through countless ages, during which the race of man spread over the earth in separate families of people, until languages were produced between which, as at present, no cognisable relation can be traced?

Or is it possible, among the principles recognised as having contributed elements more or less abundant in every known language, to indicate a sufficient cause for the entire origination of language in a generation of men who had not yet acquired the command of that great instrument of thought, though, in every natural capacity the same as ourselves?

When the question is brought to this definite stage, the same step will be gained in the science of language which was made in geology, when it was recognised that the phenomena of the science must be explained by the action of powers, such as are known to be active at the present day in working changes on the structure of the earth. The investigator of speech must accept as his starting-ground the existence of man as yet without knowledge of language, but endowed with intellectual powers and command of his bodily frame, such as we ourselves are conscious of possessing, in the same way that the geologist takes his stand on the fact of a globe composed of lands and seas subjected, as at the present day, to the influence of rains and tides, tempests, frosts, earthquakes, and subterranean fires.

A preliminary objection to the supposition of any natural origin of language has been raised by the modern German school of philosophers, whose theory leads them to deny the possibility of man having ever existed in a state of mutism.

'Man is only man by speech,' says W. v. Humboldt, 'but in order to discover speech he must already be man.' And Professor Max Müller, who cites the epigram, adopts the opinion it expresses. 'Philosophers,' he says (Lectures on the Science of Language, p. 347), 'who imagine that the first man, though left to himself, would gradually have emerged from a state of mutism, and have invented words for every new conception that arose in his mind, forget that man could not by his own power have acquired the faculty of speech, which is the distinctive character of mankind, unattained and unattainable by the mute creation.' The supposed difficulty is altogether a fallacy arising from a confusion between the faculty of speech and the actual knowledge of language.

The possession of the faculty of speech means only that man is rendered capable of speech by the original constitution of his mind and physical frame, as a bird of flying by the possession of wings; but inasmuch as man does not learn to speak, as a bird to fly, by the instinctive exercise of the proper organ, it becomes a legitimate object of inquiry how the skilled use of the tongue was originally acquired.

It is surprising that any one should have stuck at the German paradox, in the face of the patent fact that we all are born in a state of mutism, and gradually acquire the use of language from intercourse with those around us, while those who are cut off by congenital deafness from all opportunity of hearing the speech of others, remain permanently dumb, unless they have the good fortune to meet with instructors, by whom they may be taught not only to express their thoughts by manual signs, but also to speak intelligibly notwithstanding the disadvantage of not hearing their own voice.

Since then it is matter of fact that individuals are found by no means wanting in intelligence who only attain the use of speech in mature life, and others who never attain it at all, it is plain that there can be no metaphysical objection to the supposition that the family of man was in existence at a period when the use of language was wholly unknown. How man in so imperfect a state could manage to support himself, and maintain his ground against the wild beasts, is a question which need not concern us.

The high reputation of Professor Max Müller as a linguist, and the great popularity of his Lectures on Language, have given to the doctrine which he there expounds, an importance not deserved either by the clearness of the doctrine itself, or by any light which it throws on the fundamental problems of Language. He asserts (p. 369) that the 400 or 500 roots to which the languages of different families may be reduced, are neither interjections nor imitations, but 'phonetic types produced by a power inherent in human nature. Man in his primitive and perfect state had instincts of which no traces remain at the present day, the instinct being lost when the purpose for which it was required was fulfilled, as the senses become weaker when, as in the case of scent, they become useless.' By such an instinct the primitive Man was endowed with the faculty of giving articulate expression to the rational conceptions of his mind. He was * irresistibly impelled to accompany every conception of his mind by an exertion of the voice, articulately modulated in correspondence with the thought which called it forth, in a manner analogous to that in which a body, struck by a hammer, answers with a different ring according as it is composed of metal, stone, or wood.†

At the same time it must be supposed that the instinct which gave rise to the expression of thought by articulate sound, would enable those who heard such sounds to understand what was passing in the mind of the person who uttered them. At the beginning the number of these phonetic types must have been almost infinite, and it would only be by a process of natural elimination that clusters of roots, more or less synonymous, would gradually be reduced to one definite type (p. 371). Thus a stock of significant sounds would be produced from whence all the languages on earth were developed, and when ' the creative faculty, which gave to each conception as it thrilled the first time through the

* It was an instinct, an instinct of the mind as irresistible as any other instinct.—p. 370.
† The faculty peculiar to man in his primitive state by which every impression from without received its vocal expression from within must be accepted as a fact.—p. 370, n.

brain a phonetic expression,' had its object fulfilled in the establishment of language, the instinct faded away, leaving the infants of subsequent generations to learn their language of their parents, and those who should be born deaf to do as well as they could without any oral means of communicating their thoughts or desires.

By other writers of the same philosophical school the instinct is retained in permanence, in order to account for the vitality of words during the vast period of time, from the first branching off of the pristine Arian stock into different families, down to the present day. It is practically such an instinct which Curtius demands as the basis of any theory of language, in the very valuable introduction to his Grunzüge der Griech. Etym., p. 91.

In all the languages of the Indo-European family, he says ' from the Ganges to the Atlantic the same combination sta designates the phenomenon of standing, while the conception of flowing is as widely associated with the utterance plu or slightly modified forms. This cannot be accidental. The same conception can only have been united with the same vocal utterance for so many thousand years, because in the consciousness (gefühl) of the people there was an inward bond between the two, that is, because there was for them a persistent tendency to express that conception by precisely those sounds. The Philosophy of Speech must lay down the postulate of a physiologic potency of sounds (einer physiolo-gischen geltung der laute), and it can no otherwise elucidate the origin of words, than by the assumption of a relation of their sounds to the impression which the things signified by them produce on the soul of the speaker. The signification thus dwells like a soul in the vocal utterance : the conception, says W. v. Humboldt, is as little able to cast itself loose from the word as man can divest himself of his personal aspect.'

It is a fatal objection to speculations like the foregoing that they appeal to principles of which we have no distinct experience. If it were true that there is in the constitution of man a physiologic connection between the sounds sta and plu and the notion of standing and flowing respectively, it must be felt by all mankind alike, and it should have led to the universal use of those roots for the expression of the same ideas in other languages as well as those of the Indo-European stock. But in my own case I have no consciousness of any such connection. I do not find that the sound sta of itself calls up any idea in my mind, and to an unlearned English ear it is as closely connected with the ideas of stabbing, of stamping, and of starting, as it is with that of standing. We know that our children do not speak instinctively at the present day, and to say that speech came in that way to primitive Man is simply to avow our inability to give a rational account of its acquisition. A rational theory of language should indicate a process supported at every step by the evidence of actual experience, by which a being, in every other respect like ourselves, might have been led from a state of mutism to the use of Speech. Nor are the elements of a rational answer to the problem far to seek, if we are content to look for small beginnings, and do not regard the invention of language as the work of some mute genius of the ancient world, forecasting the benefits of oral communication and elaborating of himself a system of vocal signs.' If in the present state of the world,' says Charma,' some philosopher were to wonder how man ever began these houses, palaces, and vessels which we see around us, we should answer that these were not the things that man began with. The savage who first tied the branches of shrubs to make himself a shelter was not an architect, and he who first floated on the trunk of a tree was not the creator of navigation.' A like allowance must be made for the rudeness of the first steps in the process when we are required to explain the origin of the complicated languages of civilized life.

If language was the work of human intelligence we may be sure that it was accomplished by exceedingly slow degrees, and when the true mode of procedure is finally pointed out, we must not be surprised if we meet with the same apparent disproportion between the grandeur of the structure and the homeliness of the mechanism by which it was reared, which was found so great a stumbling-block in geology when the modern doctrines of that science began to prevail.

The first step is the great difficulty in the problem. If once we can imagine a man like ourselves, only altogether ignorant of language, placed in circumstances under which he will be instinctively led to make use of his voice, for the purpose of leading others to think of something beyond the reach of actual apprehension, we shall have an adequate explanation of the first act of speech.

Now if man in his pristine condition had the same instincts with ourselves he would doubtless, before he attained the command of language, have expressed his needs by means of gestures or signs addressed to the eye, as a traveller at the present day, thrown among people whose language was altogether strange to him, would signify his hunger by pointing to his mouth and making semblance of eating. Nor is there, in all probability, a tribe of savages so stupid as not to understand gestures of such a nature. ' Tell me,' says Socrates in the Cratylus, ' if we had neither tongue nor voice and wished to call attention to something, should we not imitate it as well as we could with gestures? Thus if we wanted to describe anything either lofty or light, we should indicate it by raising the hands to heaven; if we wished to describe a horse or other animal, we should represent it by as near an approach as we could make to an imitation in our own person.'

The instinctive tendency to make use of significant gestures was clearly shown in the case of Laura Bridgman, who being born blind and deaf afforded a singular opportunity for studying the spontaneous promptings of Nature. Now after Laura had learned to speak on her fingers she would accompany this artificial mode of communicating her thoughts with the imitative or symbolical gestures which were taught her by Nature. ' When Laura once spoke to me of her own crying when a little child,' says Lieber (Smithsonian contributions to Knowledge, vol. 2), 'she accompanied her words with a long face, drawing her fingers down the face, indicating the copious flow of tears.' She would also accompany her yes and no with the ordinary nod and shake of the head which are the natural expression of acceptance and aversion,* and which in her case were certainly not learned from observation of others. To suppose then that primitive Man would spontaneously make use of gestures to signify whatever it was urgently needful for him to make known to others, is merely to give him credit for the same instinctive tendencies of which we are conscious in ourselves. But strong emotion naturally exhales itself in vocal utterance as well as in muscular action. Man shouts as he jumps for joy. And this tendency is felt equally by the deaf and dumb, whose utterances are commonly harsh and disagreeable in consequence of not hearing their own voice. It was accordingly necessary to check poor Laura when inclined to indulge in this mode of giving vent to her feelings. She pleaded that ' God had given her much voice,' and would occasionally retire to enjoy the gift in her own way in private. Man then is a vocal animal, and when an occasion arose on which the sign-making instinct was called forth by the necessities of the case, he would as readily be led to imitate sound by the voice as shape and action by bodily gestures. When it happened in the infancy of communication, that some sound formed a prominent feature of the matter which it was important to make known, the same instinct which prompted the use of significant gestures, where the matter admitted of being so represented, would give rise to the use of the voice in imitation of the sound by which the subject of communication was now characterised. A person terrified by a bull would find it convenient to make known the object of his alarm by imitating at once the movements of the animal with his head, and the bellowing with his voice. A cock would be represented by an attempt at the sound of crowing, while the arms were beat against the sides in imitation of the flapping of the bird's wings. It is by signs like these that Hood describes his raw Englishman as making known his wants in France.

Moo ! I cried for milk— If I wanted bread My jaws I set agoing, And asked for new-laid eggs By clapping hands and crowing.
Hood's Own.

There would be neither sense nor fun in the caricature if it had not a basis of truth in human nature, cognisable by the large and unspeculative class for whom the author wrote. A jest must be addressed to the most superficial capacities of apprehension, and therefore may often afford better evidence of a fact of consciousness than a train of abstruse reasoning. It is on that account that so apt an illustration of the only comprehensible origin of language has been found in the old story of the Englishman at a Chinese banquet, who being curious as to the composition of a dish he was eating, turned round to his native servant with an interrogative Quack, quack ? The servant answered, Bowwow ! intimating as clearly as if he

* Me turneth thet neb blithelich touward to thinge thet me loveth, and frommard to thinge thet me hateth.—Ancren Riwle, 254.

spoke in English that it was dog and not duck that his master was eating. The communication that passed between them was essentially language, comprehensible to every one who was acquainted with the animals in question, language therefore which might have been used by the first family of man as well as by persons of different tongues at the present day.

The imitations of sound made by primitive Man, in aid of his endeavours to signify his needs by bodily gestures, would be very similar to those which are heard in our nurseries at the present day, when we represent to our children the lowing of the cow, the baaing of the sheep, or the crowing of the cock. The peculiar character of the imitation is given at first by the tone of voice and more or less abrupt mode of utterance, without the aid of distinct consonantal articulation, and in such a manner we have no difficulty in making imitations that are easily recognised by any child acquainted with the cry of the animal.

The lowing of the cow is imitated by the prolonged utterance of the vowel sound oo-ooh! or, with an initial m or b, which are naturally produced by the opening lips, mooh! or booh! In the same way the cry of the sheep is sounded in our nurseries by a broken baa-aa-ah! in Scotland bae! or mae! By degrees the imitative colouring is dropped, and the syllables moo or baa pronounced in an ordinary tone of voice are understood by the child as signifying the cry of the cow or the sheep, and, thus being associated with the animals in question in the mind of the child, might be employed to lead his thoughts to the animal itself instead of the cry which it utters, or, in other words, might be used as the name of the animal.

It so happens that the English nurse adds the names cow and lamb, by which she herself knows the animals, to the syllables which are significant to the child, who thus learns to designate the animals as moo-cow and baa-lamb, but nothing of this kind could take place at the commencement of language, when neither party was as yet in possession of a name for the object to be designated, and in some cases the same syllables by which the nurse imitates the cry are used without addition as the name of the animal itself. The bark of a dog is represented in our nurseries by the syllables bow-wow, and the child is first taught to know the dog as a bowwow.

The syllables moo (mu, muh) and mae (mè, mäh) in the South of Germany represent the voice of the cow and the sheep or goat, and with Swabian children muh and mäh are the names of the cow and sheep or goat (Schmid). In parts of England the imitative moo is lengthened out into mully, in the sense of lowing or suppressed bellowing; and mully or mully cow is the children's name of the cow. The Northamptonshire dairymaid calls her cows to milking, come Moolls, come Moolls! (Mrs Baker). On the same principle among Swabian children the name of Molle, Molli, or Mollein, is given to a cow or calf.

It is true that the names we have cited are appropriated to the use of children, but it makes no difference in the essential nature of the contrivance, by whom the sign is to be understood; and where we are seeking, in language of the present day, for analogies with the first instinctive endeavours to induce thought in others by the exercise of the voice, the more undeveloped the understanding of the person to whom the communication is addressed, the closer we shall approach to the conditions under which language must have sprung up in the infancy of Man. Where then can the principle which first gave it significance be sought for with so much reason, as in the forms of speech adapted to the dawning intellect of our own children, and in the process by which it is made comprehensible to them ?

Dr Lieber, in his paper on the vocal sounds of Laura Bridgman above cited, gives an instructive account of the birth of a word under his own eyes.

' A member of my own family,' he says, ' showed in early infancy a peculiar tendency to form new words, partly from sounds which the child caught, as to woh for to stop, from the interjection woh! used by wagoners when they wish to stop their horses; partly from symphenomenal emission of sounds. Thus when the boy was a little above a year old he had made and established in the nursery the word nim, for everything fit to eat. I had watched the growth of this word. First, he expressed his satisfaction at seeing his meal, when hungry, by the natural humming sound, which all of us are apt to produce when approving or pleased with things of a common character, and which we might express thus, hm. Gradually, as his organs of speech became more skilful and repetition made the sound more familiar and clearer, it changed to the more articulate um and im. Finally an n was placed before it, nim being much easier to pronounce than im when the mouth has been closed. But soon the growing mind began to generalise, and nim came to signify everything edible; so that the boy would add the words good or bad which he learned in the mean time. He would now say good nim, bad nim, his nurse adopting the word with him. On one occasion he said fie nim, for bad, repulsive to eat. There is no doubt that a verb to nim for to eat would have developed itself, had not the ripening mind adopted the vernacular language which was offered to it ready made. We have, then, here the origin and history of a word which commenced in a symphenomenal sound, and gradually became articulate in sound and general in its meaning, as the organs of speech, as well as the mind of the utterer, became more perfect. And is not the history of this word a representation of many thousands in every language now settled and acknowledged as a legitimate tongue ?'

Dr Lieber does not seem to have been aware how frequent a phenomenon it is which he describes, nor how numerous the forms in actual speech connected with the notion of eating which may be traced to this particular imitation. A near relation of my own in early childhood habitually used mum or mummum for food or eating, analogous to Magyar mammogni, Gr. μαμμᾶν (Hesych.), in children's language, to eat. Heinicke, an eminent teacher of the deaf-and-dumb cited by Tylor (Early Hist., p. 72), says: 'All mutes discover words for themselves for different things. Among over fifty whom I have partially instructed or been acquainted with, there was not one who had not uttered at least a few spoken names which he had discovered for himself, and some were very clear and distinct. I had under my instruction a born deaf-mute, nineteen years old, who had previously invented many writable words for things. For instance, he called to eat, mumm, to drink, schipp, &c.' In ordinary speech we have the verb to mump, to move the lips with the mouth closed, to work over with the mouth, as to mump food (Webster); to mumble, to chew with toothless gums; Swedish mummsa, to mump, mumble, chew with difficulty (Oehrlander); Bavarian memmeln, memmexen, mumpfen, mumpfeln, to move the lips in continued chewing; mampfen, to eat with a full mouth; on. mumpa, to fill the mouth, to eat greedily (Haldorsen). With a different development of the initial sound we have Galla djam djeda, djamdjamgoda (to say djam, make djamdjam), to smack in eating; South Jutland hiamsk, voracious, greedy; at hiamske i sig, to eat in a greedy swinish manner (Molbech); Swedish dialect gamsa, jamsa (yamsa), jammla, jumla, to chew laboriously, to mumble, leading to the Yorkshire yam, to eat; yamming, eating, or more particularly the audibility of the masticating process (Whitby Gl.). To yam is a slang term for eating among sailors. In the Negro Dutch of Surinam nyam is to eat; nyam nyam, food (Tylor, Primitive Culture, i. 186). The Chinese child uses nam for eat, agreeing with Fin. nama (in children's language), Sw. namnam, Wolof nabenabe, delicacies, tidbits; Zooloo namlita, to smack the lips after eating or tasting, and thence to be tasteful, to be pleasant to the mind; Soosoo (W. Africa) nimnim, to taste; Vei (W. Africa) nimi, palatable, savory, sweet (Koelle). And as picking forbidden food would afford the earliest and most natural type of appropriating or stealing, it is probable that we have here the origin of the slang word nim, to take or steal (indicated in the name of Corporal Nym), as well as the Sw. dial. nimma, Gothic niman, to take. Nimm'd up, taken up hastily on the sly, stolen, snatched (Whitby Gl.). 'Motherwell, the Scotch poet,' says the author of Modern Slang, 'thought the old word nim (to snatch or pick up) was derived from nam, nam, the tiny words or cries of an infant when eating anything which pleases its little palate. A negro proverb has the word: Buckra man nam crab, crab nam buckra man. Or, in the buckra man's language: White man eat [or steal] the crab, and the crab eats the white man.'—p. 180.

The traces of imitation as a living principle giving significance to words have been recognised from the earliest period, and as it was the only principle on which the possibility of coining words came home to the comprehension of every one, it was called Onomatopoeia, or word-making, while the remaining stock of language was vaguely regarded as having come by inheritance from the first establishers of speech. 'Ονοματοποιία quidem,' says Quintilian, 'id est, fictio nominis, Graecis inter maximas habita virtutes, nobis vix permittitur. Et sunt plurima ita posita ab iis qui sermonem primi fecerunt, aptantes adfectibus vocem. Nam mugitus et sibilus et murmur inde venerunt.' And Diomedes, 'Ονοματοποιία est dictio configurata ad imitandam vocis confusae significationem, ut tinnitus aeris, clangorque tubarum. Item quum dicimus valvos stridere, oves balare, aves tinnire.'—Lersch, Sprach-philosophie der Alten, iii. 130-1. Quintilian instances the words used by Homer for the twanging of the bow (λίγξ βιός), and the fizzing of the fiery stake (σίζε) in the eye of Polyphemus. The principle is admitted in a grudging way by Max Müller (2nd Series, p. 298): 'There are in many languages words, if we can call them so, consisting of mere imitations of the cries of animals or the sounds of nature, and some of them have been carried along by the stream of language into the current of nouns and verbs.' And elsewhere (p. 89) with less hesitation, 'That sounds can be rendered in language by sounds, and that each language possesses a large stock of words imitating the sounds given out by certain things, who would deny?'

We could not have a clearer admission of the imitative principle as a vera causa in the origination of language. Yet in general he revolts against so simple a solution of the problem.

'I doubt,' he says, speaking of words formed on the bowwow principle, ' whether it deserves the name of language.' ' If the principle of onomatopoeia is applicable anywhere it would be in the formation of the names of animals. Yet we listen in vain for any similarity between goose and cackling, hen and clucking, duck and quacking, sparrow and chirping, dove and cooing, hog and grunting, cat and mewing, between dog and barking, yelping, snarling, and growling. We do not speak of a bowwow, but of a dog. We speak of a cow, not of a moo; of a lamb, not of a baa.'—Lect. p. 363.

We shall answer the objection by showing that the name of the animal in the greater part of the instances specified by Müller is a plain onomatopoeia in one language or another; that we do speak of a Moo and of a Baa in some other language if not in English, and that this plan of designation is widely spread over every region of the world, and applied to every kind of animal which utters a notable sound. As far as the cry itself is concerned it would hardly occur to any one to doubt that the word used to designate the utterance of a particular animal would be taken from imitation of the sound. When once it is admitted that there is an instinctive tendency to imitation in Man, it seems self-evident that he would make use of that means of representing any particular sound that he was desirous of bringing to the notice of his fellow. And it is only on this principle that we can account for the great variety of the terms by which the cries of different animals are expressed. Indeed, we still for the most part recognise the imitative intent of such words as the clucking of hens, cackling or gaggling of geese, gobbling of a turkey-cock, quacking of ducks or frogs, cawing or quawking of rooks, croaking of frogs or ravens, cooing or crooing of doves, hooting of owls, bumping of bitterns, chirping of sparrows or crickets, twittering of swallows, chattering of pies or monkeys, neighing or whinnying of horses, purring or mewing of cats, yelping, howling, barking, snarling of dogs, grunting or squealing of hogs, bellowing of bulls, lowing of oxen, bleating of sheep, baaing or maeing of lambs.

While ewes shall bleat and little lambkins maa.—Ramsay.

But the cry of an animal can hardly be brought to mind without drawing with it the thoughts of the animal itself. Thus the imitative utterance, intended in the first instance to represent the cry, might be used, when circumstances required, for the purpose of bringing the animal, or anything connected with it, before the thoughts of our hearer, or, in other words, might be used as the designation of the animal or of anything associated with it. If I take refuge in an African village and imitate the roaring of a lion while I anxiously point to a neighbouring thicket, I shall intimate pretty clearly to the natives that a lion is lurking in that direction. Here the imitation of the roar will be practically used as the name of a lion. The gestures with which I point will signify that an object of terror is in the thicket, and the sound of my voice will specify that object as a lion.

The signification is carried on from the cow to the milk which it produces, when Hood makes his Englishman ask for milk by an imitative moo. In the same way the representation of the clucking of a hen by the syllables cock! cock! gack! gack! (preserved in It. coccolare, Bav. gackern, to cluck) gives rise to the forms coco, kukó, and gaggele or gagkelein, which are used as the designation of an egg in the nursery language of France, Hungary, and Bavaria respectively. In Basque, kokoratz represents the clucking of a hen, and koko (in children's speech) the egg which it announces (Salaberry). It is among birds that the imitative nature of the name is seen with the clearest evidence, and is most universally admitted. We all are familiar with the voice of the cuckoo, which we hail as the harbinger of spring. We imitate the sound with a modulated hoo-hoo, hardening into a more conventional cook-coo, and we call the bird cuckoo with a continued consciousness of the intrinsic significance of the name. The voice of the bird is so singularly distinct that there is hardly any variation in the syllables used to represent the sound in different languages. In Lat. it is cuculus (coo-coo-l-us), in Gr. κόκκυξ, in G. kuckuch (cook-cook) or guckguck. In Sanscrit the cry is written kuhú, and the bird is called kuhúka, kuhú-rava (rava, sound), whose sound is kuhú—(Pictet, Origines Indo-Européennes). We represent the cry of birds of the crow kind by the syllable caw or quawk, which is unmistakably the source of the name in the most distant dialects, as Du. kauwe, kae, Picard cau, a daw, Sanscr. káka, Arabic kák, ghák, Georgian quaki, Malay gágak, Barabra koka, Manchu kaha, a crow (Pictet). British Columbia kahkah, a crow. Longfellow in his Hiawatha gives kahkahgee as the Algonquin name of the raven. The imitative nature of such names as these have been recognised from the earliest times, and a Sanscrit writer of at least the 4th century before Christ is quoted by Müller (Lect. i. 380, 4th ed.). 'Káka, crow, is an imitation of the sound (káku káka, according to Durga), and this is very common among birds.' But already Philosophy was beginning to get the better of common sense, and the author continues: 'Aupamanyava however maintains that imitation of the sound does never take place. He therefore derives káka, crow, from apaká-layitavya; i. e. a bird that is to be driven away.' Another Sanscrit name for the crow is kárava (whose voice is ká), obviously formed on the same plan with kuhurava (whose voice is kuhú) for the cuckoo. Yet the word is cited by Müller as an example of the fallacious derivations of the onomatopoeists. Kárava, he says, is supposed to show some similarity to the cry of the raven. But as soon as we analyse the word we find that it is of a different structure from cuckoo or cock. It is derived from a root ru or kru, having a general predicative power, and means a shouter, a caller, a crier (p. 349, 1st ed.). Sometimes the hoarse sound of the cry of this kind of bird introduces an r into the imitative syllable, and we use the verb to croak to designate their cry, while crouk, in the North of England, is the name for a crow. So we have Polish krukac, to croak, kruk, a crow; Lith. kraukti, to croak, krauklys, a crow; Du. kraeyen, to caw or croak, kraeye, G. krähe, a crow. The corresponding verbal forms in German and English krähen, to crow, have been appropriated by arbitrary custom to the cry of the cock, but the word is not less truly imitative because it is adapted to represent different cries of somewhat similar sound. In South America a crowlike bird is called caracara.

The crowing of a cock is represented by the syllables kikeriki in G., coquericot in Fr., cacaracá in Languedoc, leaving no doubt of the imitative origin of Illyrian kukurekati, Malay kukuk, to crow, as well as of Sanscr. kukkuta. Fin. kukko, Esthonian kikkas, Yoruba koklo, Ibo akoka, Zulu kuku, and E. cock.

The cooing or crooing (as it was formerly called) of a dove is signified in G. by the verbs gurren or girren. Da. kurre, girre, Du. korren, kirren, koeren. To a Latin ear it must have sounded tur, tur, giving turtur (and thence It. tórtora, tórtola, Sp. tórtola, and E. turtle) as the Lat. name of the bird, the imitative nature of which has been universally recognised from its reduplicate form. Albanian tourre, Heb. tor, a dove. In Peru turtuli is one kind of dove; cuculi another. Hindi, ghughu, Pers. kuku, gugu, wood-pigeon.

The plaintive cry of the peewit is with no less certainty represented in the names by which the bird is known in different European dialects, in which we recognise a fundamental resemblance in sound, with a great variety in the particular consonants used in the construction of the word: English peewit, Scotch peeweep, teewhoop, tuquheit, Dutch kievit, German kiebitz, Lettish kiekuts, Magy. lilits, libuts, Swedish kowipa, French dixhuit, Arabic tátwit. The consonants t, p, k, produce a nearly similar effect in the imitation of inarticulate sounds, and when an interchange of these consonants is found in parallel forms (that is, synonymous forms of similar structure), either in the same or in related dialects, it may commonly be taken as evidence that the imitative force of the word has been felt at no distant period.

The hooting of the owl is a note that peculiarly invites imitation, and accordingly it has given rise to a great variety of names the imitative character of which cannot be mistaken. Thus Latin ulula may be compared with ululare, or Gr. ὀλολύζειν, to cry loudly. In French we have hulotte from huller, to howl or yell, as Welsh hwan from hwa, to hoot. Lat. bubo, Fr. hibou, It. gufo, German buhu, uhu, Mod.Gr. coucouva, coccovaec, Walachian coucouveike, Algonquin kos-kos-koo-o, are all direct imitations of the repeated cry.

'The cry of the owl,' says Stier in Kuhn's Zeitschrift, xi. p. 219, 'ku-ku-ku-va-i is in the south (of Albania) the frequent origin of the name, in which sometimes the first, sometimes the second part, and sometimes both together, are represented.'

Mr Farrar in his Chapters on Language (p. 24) observes that if the vocabulary of almost any savage nation is examined, the name of an animal will generally be found to be an onomatopoeia, and he cites from Threlkeld's Australian Grammar kong-ko-rong, the emu; pip-pi-ta, a small hawk; kong-kong, frogs; all expressly mentioned by the author as taking their names from their cry. No one will doubt that the name of the pelican karong-karong is formed in the same manner. Mr Bates gives us several examples from the Amazons. 'Sometimes one of these little bands [of Toucans] is seen perched for hours together among the topmost branches of high trees giving vent to their remarkably loud, shrill, and yelping cry. These cries have a vague resemblance to the syllables tocano, tocano, and hence the Indian name of this genus of birds.'—Naturalist on the Amazons, i. 337. Speaking of a cricket he says, 'The natives call it tananá, in allusion to its music, which is a sharp resonant stridulation resembling the syllables ta-na-ná, ta-na-ná, succeeding each other with little intermission.'—i. 250. We may compare the Parmesan tananái, loud noise, rumour; Arabic tantanat, sound, resounding of musical instruments.—Catafogo.

The name of the cricket indeed, of which there are infinite varieties, may commonly be traced to representations of the sharp chirp of the insect. Thus E. cricket is from crick, representing a short sharp sound, as, G. schrecke, (Heuschrecke), schrickel, from schrick, a sharp sound as of a glass cracking (Schmeller). G. schirke. Fin. sirkka, may be compared with G. zirken, OE. chirk, to chirp; Lith. swirplys with G. schwirren, to chirp; Lat. gryllus, G. grille, with Fr. griller, to creak; Bret. skril with N. skryle, Sc. skirl, to shrill or sound sharp. The Arabic sarsor, Corean sirsor, Albanian tsentsir, Basque quirquirra carry their imitative character on their face.

The designation of insects from the humming, booming, buzzing, droning, noises which they make in their flight is very common. We may cite Gr. βομβύλιος, the humble- or bumble-bee, or a gnat; Sanscr. bambhara, bee, bamba, fly, 'words imitative of humming'—Pictet; Australian bumberoo, a fly (Tylor); Galla bombi, a beetle; German hummel, the drone or non-working bee; Sanscr. druna, a bee, Lithuanian tranas, German drohne, a drone, to be compared with Sanscr. dhran, to sound, German drönen, to hum, resound, Danish drön, din, peal, hollow noise, Gaelic dranndan, humming, buzzing, growling. The drone of a bagpipe is the open pipe which keeps up a monotonous humming while the tune is playing. The cockchafer is known by the name of the buzzard in the North of England.

'And I eer'd un a bumming away Like a buzzard-clock o'er my eead.'—Tennyson, Northern Farmer.

Basque burrumba, a muttering noise as of distant thunder;' a cockchafer (Salaberri). The Welsh chwyrnu, to buzz (corresponding to Swedish hurra and E. whirr), gives rise to chwymores, a hornet, and probably indicates that G. horniss and E. hornet are from the buzzing flight of the animal, and not from its sting considered as a horn. The name of the gnat may be explained from Norse gnetta, knetta, to rustle, give a faint sound, Danish gnaddre, to grumble.

Coming to the names of domestic animals we have seen that the lowing of the ox is represented by the syllables boo and moo. In the N. of England it is called booing, and a Spanish proverb cited by Tylor (Prim. Cult. 188) shows that the same mode of representing the sound is familiar in Spain. 'Hablá el buey e dijó bu!' The ox spoke and said boo! From this mode of representing the sound are formed Lith. bubauti (to boo-boo), to bellow like a bull, Zulu bubula, to low, and (as we apply the term bellowing to the loud shouting of men) Gr. βοάω, to shout, Lat. boö, to shout, to make a loud deep sound. From the same imitative syllable are Lith. bubenti, to grumble as distant thunder; búbnas, a drum; búbleti, to bump as a bittern; Illyr. bubati, to beat hard, to make a noise; Galla boa, to boohoo, to weep.

In barbarous languages the notion of action is frequently expressed, and a verbal form given to the word by the addition of elements signifying make or say. Thus from mamook, make, the traders' jargon of Columbia has mamook-poo, to make poo, to shoot; mamook-heeheek, to make laugh, to amuse.—Tylor. The Galla uses goda, to make, and djeda, to say, in the same way, and from bilbil, imitation of a ringing sound, it has bilbilgoda, to ring, to sound. The same office is performed in an advanced stage of language in a more compendious way by the addition of an l, a k or g, or a z to the imitative syllable. Thus from miau, representing the mew of a cat, the Fr. forms miau-l-er, as the Illyr. (with a subsidiary k), maukati, to mew. From baa, or bae, are formed Lat. ba-l-are, Fr. bé-l-er, to baa or bleat; from bau, representing the bark of a dog, Piedmontese fè bau, or bau-l-è, to make bow, to bow-wow or bark. The Piedm. verb is evidently identical with our own bawl, to shout, or with our baula, to low or bellow, whence baula, a cow, bauli, boli, W. bwla, a bull. In Swiss the verb takes the form of bullen, agreeing exactly with Lith. bullus and E. bull. On the same principle, from the imitative moo instead of boo, the Northampton dairymaid calls her cows moolies.

The formation of the verb by a subsidiary k or g gives Gr. μυκάομαι, Illyr. mukati, bukati, Lat. mugire, OFr. mugler, bugler, Da. löge, to low; and thence Lat. buculus, a bullock, bucula, a heifer, Fr. bugle, a buffalo, bullock, a name preserved in our bugle-horn. With these analogies, and those which will presently be found in the designations of the sheep or goat and their cries, it is truly surprising to meet with linguistic scholars who deny that the imitative boo can be the origin of forms like Gr. βοῦς, Lat. bos, bovis, It. bue, ox, Norse bu, cattle, W. bu, Gael. bo, Manx booa, Hottentot bou (Dapper), Cochin Chinese bo (Tylor), a cow. Yet Geiger, in his Ursprung der menschlichen Sprache [1868], p. 167, plainly asserts that the supposition of such an origin is inadmissible. His analysis leads him to the conclusion that the words βοῦς and cow may be traced to a common origin in the root guau, and therefore cannot be taken from the cry of the animal. But when I find that the ox is widely called Boo among different families of men from Connemara to Cochin China, it seems to me far more certain that the name is taken from the booing of the animal than any dogmas can be that are laid down concerning such abstractions as the Sanskrit roots.

The cry of the sheep or goat is universally imitated by the syllables baa, bae, ma, mae, as that of the cow by boo, or moo, and in Hottentot baa was the name of a sheep, as bou of an ox. In the Vei of W. Africa baa, in Wolof bae, a goat. With a subsidiary k or g the imitative syllable produces Swiss läggen, bäggen, Magy. bek-eg-ni, beg-et-ni, Illyr. beknuti, to bleat, and thus explains the origin of forms like Sw. lägge (Rietz), a sheep or ewe, Gr. βῆκη, βῆκον (Hesych.), a sheep or goat, Illyr. bekavica, a sheep. It. becco, a goat. From the imitative mae, we have Sanscr. menâda (nâda, sound, cry), a goat; and with a subsidiary k or g, Gr. μηκάομαι, μηκάζω, Illyr. meketati, mecati, G. meckern, Magy. mekegni, Gael. meigeal, Vorarlberg mäggila (corresponding to Fr. meugler, for the voice of the ox), to bleat; Gr. μηκάδες, goats, lambs. The same radical with a subsidiary l gives Gael. mèil, Manx meilee, to bleat, showing the origin of Scotch Mailie, as the proper name of a tame sheep, and of Gr. μῆλον (maelon), a sheep or a goat, and Circassian maylley, a sheep (Löwe).

The name of the hog is another instance where Müller implicitly denies all resemblance with the characteristic noises of the animal. And it is true there is no similarity between hog and grunt, but the snorting sounds emitted by a pig may be imitated at least as well by the syllables hoc'h, hoc'h (giving to c'h the guttural sound of Welsh and Breton), as by grunt. In evidence of the aptness of this imitation, we may cite the cry used in Suffolk in driving pigs, remembering that the cries addressed to animals are commonly taken from noises made by themselves. 'In driving, or in any way persuading, this obstinate race, we have no other imperative than hooe! hooe! in a deep nasal, guttural tone, appropriately compounded of a groan and a grunt.'—Moor's Suffolk words, in v. sus-sus. Hence Breton hoc'ha, to grunt, and hoc'h, houc'h, W. hwch, a hog, leaving little doubt as to the imitative origin of the E. name. In like manner we find Lappish snorkeset, to grunt, undoubtedly imitative, and snorke, a pig; Fin. naskia, to smack like a pig in eating, and naski, a pig. If Curtius had been aware of the Sc. grumpf, a grunt, and grumphie, a sow, he would hardly have connected Hesychius' γρόμφας, a sow, with the root γράφω, applied to the rooting of the animal with its snout. Moreover, although the imitation embodied in Lat. grunnire, Fr. grogner, and E. grunt, does not produce a name of the animal itself, it gives rise to It. grugno, Fr. groin, E. grunny, the snout of a pig, and thence groin, the snout-shaped projections running out into the sea, by which the shingle of our southern coast is protected. And obviously it is equally damaging to Müller's line of argument whether the onomatopoeia supplies a name of the animal or only of his snout.

Among the designations of a dog the term cur, signifying a snarling, ill-bred dog, may with tolerable certainty be traced to an imitative source in ON. karra, to snarl, growl, grumble, G. kurren, to rumble, grumble. Kurren und murren, ill-natured jangling; Sc. curmurring, grumbling, rumbling. The G. kurre, OE. curre-fish (as Da. knurfisk, from knurre, to growl, mutter, purr), is applied to the gurnard on account of the grumbling sounds which that fish is said to utter. It is probable also that E. hound, G. hund, a dog, may be identical with Esthon. hunt (gen. hundi), a wolf, from hundama, to howl, corresponding to OHG. hunon.

to yelp, &c. hune, to whine. So Sanscr. hrdrava (whose cry is hd), a jackal (Benfey).

The nursery names of a horse are commonly taken from the cries used in the management of the animal, which serve the purpose as well as the cries of the animal itself, since all that is wanted is the representation of a sound associated in a lively manner with the thought of the creature to be named.

In England the cry to make a horse go on is gee, and the nursery name for a horse is geegee. In Germany hott is the cry to make a horse turn to the right; ho, to the left, and the horse is with children called hotte-pärd (Danneil), hütt-jenho-peerd (Holstein Idiot.). In Switzerland the nursery name is hottihuh, as in Yorkshire highty (Craven Gloss.), from the cry hait, to turn a horse to the right. In Finland, humma, the cry to stop or back a horse, is used in nursery language as the name of the animal. The cry to back a horse in Westerwald is huf! whence houfe, to go backwards. The same cry in Devonshire takes the form of haap! haap back! Provincial Da. hoppe dig! back! From the cry thus used in stopping a horse the animal in nursery language is called hoppe in Frisian (Outzen), houpy in Craven, while hüpp-peerdken in Holstein is a hobby horse or child's wooden horse. Thus we are led to the Fr. hobin, E. hobby, a little ambling horse, G. hoppe, a mare, Esthonian hobbo, hobben, a horse.

In the face of so many examples it is in vain for Müller to speak of onomatopœia as an exceptional principle giving rise to a few insignificant names, but exercising no appreciable influence in the formation of real language. ‘The onomatopœic theory goes very smoothly as long as it deals with cackling hens and quacking ducks, but round that poultry-yard there is a dead wall, and we soon find that it is behind that wall that language really begins.’—2nd Series, p. 91.

‘There are of course some names, such as cuckoo, which are clearly formed by an imitation of sound. But words of this kind are, like artificial flowers, without a root. They are ‘sterile and unfit to express anything beyond the one object which they imitate.’ ‘As the word cuckoo predicates nothing but the sound of a particular bird, it could never be applied for expressing any general quality in which other animals might share, and the only derivations to which it might give rise are words expressive of a metaphorical likeness with the bird.’—1st Series, p. 365.

The author has been run away with by his own metaphorical language. An onomatopœia can only be said to have no root because it is itself a living root, as well adapted to send forth a train of derivations as if it was an offshoot from some anterior stock. If a certain character is strongly marked in an animal, the name of the animal is equally likely to be used in the metaphorical designation of the character in question, whether it was taken from the cry of the animal or from some other peculiarity. The ground of the metaphor lies in the nature of the animal, and can in no degree be affected by the principle on which the name of the species is formed. Thus the comparison with artificial flowers becomes a transparent fallacy which the author ought at once to have erased, when he found himself in the same page indicating derivatives like cuckold, coquette, cockade, coquelicot, as springing from his types of a lifeless stock. If onomatopœias can be used in giving names to things that bear a metaphorical likeness to the original object, what is there to limit their efficiency in the formation of language? And how can the indication of such derivatives as the foregoing, be reconciled with the assertion that there is a sharp line of demarcation between the region of onomatopoeia and the 'real' commencement of language? The important question is not what number of words can be traced to an imitative source, but whether there is any difference in kind between them and other words.

The imitative principle will in no degree be impugned by bringing forwards any number of names which cannot be shown to have sprung from direct imitation, for no rational onomatopoeist ever supposed that all names were formed on that principle. It is only at the very beginning of language that the name would necessarily be taken from representations of sounds connected with the animal. As soon as a little command of language was attained, a more obvious means of designation would frequently be found in something connected with the appearance or habits of the animal, and it is a self-evident fact that many of the animals with which we are familiar are named on this principle. The redbreast, white-throat, redpole, lapwing, wagtail, goatsucker, woodpecker, swift, diver, creeper, speak for themselves, and a little research enables us to explain the name in innumerable other cases on a similar plan. Nor will there be any presumption against an imitative origin even in cases where the meaning of the name remains wholly unknown. When once the name is fully conventionalised all consciousness of resemblance with sound is easily lost, and it will depend upon accident whether extrinsic evidence of such a connection is preserved. There is nothing in the E. name of the turtle or turtle-dove to put us in mind of the cooing of the animal, and if all knowledge of the Lat. turtur and its derivatives had been lost, there would have been no grounds for suspicion of the imitative origin of the word. It is not unlikely that the ON. hross, E. horse, may have sprung from a form corresponding to Sanscr. hresh, to neigh, but as we are ignorant of any Indian name corresponding to horse, or any Western equivalent of the Sanscr. hresh, it would be rash to regard the connection of the two as more than a possibility. Even in case of designations appropriated to the cries of particular animals or certain kinds of sound, it is commonly more from the consciousness of a natural tendency to represent sound in this manner, and indeed from the conviction that it is the only possible way of doing so, that we regard the words as intentionally imitative, than from discerning in them any intrinsic resemblance to the sounds represented. The neighing of a horse is signified by words strikingly unlike even in closely related tongues; Fr. hennir, It. nitrire, Sp. rinchar, relinchar, Sw. wrena, wrenska, g. frenschen, wiehern, Du. runniken, ginniken, brieschen, Sanscr. hresh, Bohem. řehtati, Lettish sweegt. Yet we cannot doubt that they all take their rise in vocal imitations of the sound of neighing or whinnying.

With the designations of animal cries may be classed those of various inarticulate noises of our own, as sigh, sob, moan, groan, cough, laugh (originally pronounced with a guttural), titter, giggle, hickup (Sanscr. hikkā, Pl.D. hukkup, snukkup), snore, snort, wheeze, shriek, scream, the imitative nature of which will be generally admitted.

The sound of a sneeze is peculiarly open to imitation. It is represented in e. by the forms a-kishoo ! or a-atcha ! of which the first is nearly identical with the Sanscr. root kshu, or the w. tisio (tisho), to sneeze. From the other mode of representing the sound a child of my acquaintance gave to his sister the name of Atchoo, on account of her sneezing; and among American tribes it gives rise to several striking onomatopoeias cited by Tylor; haitshu, atchini, atchian, aritischane, &c.

It is certain that where in the infancy of Speech the need was felt of bringing a sound of any kind to the thoughts of another, an attempt would be made to imitate it by the voice. And even at the present day it is extremely common to give life to a narration by the introduction of intentionally imitative words, whose only office it is to bring before the mind of the hearer certain sounds which accompany the action described, and bring it home to the imagination with the nearest approach to actual experience.

' Bang, bang, bang ! went the cannon, and the smoke rolled over the trenches.' ' Hoo, hoo, hoo ! ping ping, ping ! came the bullets about their ears.' 'Haw, haw, haw ! roared a soldier from the other side of the valley.' 'And at it both sides went, ding, dong ! till the guns were too hot to be worked.'—Read, White Lies, 1865.

To fall plump into the water is to fall so suddenly as to make the sound 'plump.' 'Plump! da fiel he in das wasser.' So smack represents the sound of a sharp blow, and to cut a thing smack off is to cut it off at a blow. Ding-dong, for the sound of a large bell, ting-ting, for a small one; tick-tack, for the beat of a clock; pit-a-pat, for the beating of the heart or the light step of a child; thwick-thwack, for the sound of blows, are familiar to every one. The words used in such a manner in German are especially numerous. Klapp, klatsch, for the sound of a blow. ' He kreeg enen an de oren : klapp ! segde dat' : he caught it on the ear, clap ! it cried—Brem. Wtb. A smack on the chops is represented also by pratz, plitsch-platsch.—Sanders. Puff, pump, bumm, for the sound of a fall; knack, for that of breaking; knarr, for the creaking of a wheel, fitsche-fatsche, for blows with a rod, stripp-strapp-stroll, for the sound of milking.

When once a syllable is recognised as representing sound of a certain kind it may be used to signify anything that produces such a sound, or that is accompanied by it. Few words are more expressive than the e. bang, familiarly used to represent the sound of a gun and other loud toneless noises. Of a like formation are Lettish lunga, a drum; debbes-bungotais (debbes, heaven), the God of thunder; Zulu bongo, for the report of a musket (Colenso); Australian bung-bung ween, thunder (Tylor); Vei gbengben, a kind of drum. To bang is then to do anything that makes a noise of the above description, to beat, to throw violently down, &c. Let. bangas, the dashing of the sea; Vei gbangba, to hammer, to drive in a nail; on. banga, to hammer; Da. banke, to knock, beat, throb.

The sharp cry of a chicken or a young child is represented by the syllables pi, pu.
We sall gar chekinnis cheip and gaislingis pew.—Lyndsay.
In Austria pi! pi! is used as a call to chickens (Tylor). Fr. piou, piou, peep, peep, the voice of chickens (Cot.) ; piailler, piauler, E. pule, to cry like a chick, a whelp, or a young child; Gr. πιπίζω, Lat. pipilo, pipio, Mantuan far pipi, to cry pi, pi, to cheep like a bird or a young child. It. pipiare, pipare, to pip like a chicken or pule like a hawk; pigolare, pigiolare, to squeak, pip as a chicken.—Florio. Magyar pip, cry of young birds; pipegni, pipelni, to peep or cheep; pipe, a chicken or gosling; Lat. pipio, a young bird; It. pippione, pigione, piccione, a (young) pigeon. The syllable representing a sharp sound is then used to designate a pipe, as the simplest implement for producing the sound. Fr. pipe, a fowler's bird call; G. pfeife, a fife or musical pipe. At last all reference to sound is lost, and the term is generalised in the sense of any hollow trunk or cylinder.
In cases such as these, where we have clear imitations of sound to rest on, it is easy to follow out the secondary applications, but where without such a clue we take the problem up at the other end and seek to divine the imitative origin of a word, we must beware of fanciful speculations like those of De Brosses, who finds a power of expressing fixity and firmness in an initial st; excavation and hollow in sc; mobility and fluid in fl, and so forth. It seems to him that the teeth being the most fixed element of the organ of voice, the dental letter, t, has been unconsciously (machinalement) employed to designate fixity, as k, the letter proceeding from the hollow of the throat, to designate cavity and hollow. S, which he calls the nasal articulation, is added to intensify the expression. Here he abandons the vera causa of the imitation of sound, and assumes a wholly imaginary principle of expression. What consciousness has the child, or the uneducated man, of the part of the mouth by which the different consonants are formed ?
But even the question as to the adaptation of certain articulations to represent particular sounds will be judged very differently by different ears. To one the imitative intention of a word will appear self-evident, while another will be wholly unable to discern in the word any resemblance to the sound which it is supposed to represent. The writer of a critique on Wilson's Prehistoric Man can find no adaptation to sound in the words, laugh, scream, bleat, cry, and whimper. He asks, 'What is there in whimper which is mimetic ? and if simper had been used instead, would there have been less onomatopœia ? Is rire like laugh ? Yet to a Frenchman, doubtless, rire seems the more expressive of the two.'
In language, as in other subjects of study, the judgment must be educated by a wide survey of the phenomena, and their relations, and few who are so prepared will doubt the imitative nature of the word in any of the instances above cited from Wilson.
Evidence of an imitative origin may be found in various circumstances, notably in what is called a reduplicate form of the word, where the significant syllable is repeated with or without some small variation, either in the vowel or consonantal sound, as in Lat. murmur (by the side of G. murren, to grumble), turtur, susurrus (for sur-sur-us) ; tintinno, tintino, along with tinnio, to ring ; pipio, to cry pi, pi ; It. tontonare, tonare, to thunder, rattle, rumble (Fl.); gorgogliare (to make gorgor), to gurgle; Mod.Gr. γαργαρίζω (to make gargar), to gargle; βορβορίζω, It. borbogliare (to make borbor), to rattle, rumble, bubble, along with Du. borrelen, to bubble; Zulu raraza, to fizz like fat in frying; Hindoo tomtom, a drum ; W. Indian chack-chack, a rattle made of hard seeds in a tight-blown bladder (Kingsley), to be compared with Sc. chack, to clack, to make a clinking noise, or with Manchu kiakseme (seme, sound), sound of dry wood breaking.

If laugh were written as it is pronounced, laaff, there would be nothing in the word itself to put us in mind of the thing signified. The imitation begins to be felt in the guttural ach of G. lachen, and is clearly indicated in the reduplicate form of the Du. lachachen, to hawhaw or laugh loud, preserved by Kilian. The same principle of expression is carried still further in the Dayak kakakkaka, to go on laughing loud ; Manchu kaka-kiki, or kaka-faka, Pacific aka-aka, loud laughter. Mr Tylor illustrates the Australian wiiti, to laugh, by quoting from the 'Tournament of Tottenham,'

We te he ! quoth Tyb, and lugh.

In other cases the imitative intention is witnessed by a variation of the vowel corresponding to changes in the character of the sound represented. Thus crack signifies a loud hard noise; crick, a sharp short one, like the noise of a glass breaking; creak, a prolonged sharp sound. Clack expresses such a sound as that of two hard pieces of wood striking against each other ; click, a short sharp sound, as the click of a latch or a trigger; cluck, a closed or obscure sound. Hindustani karak is rendered, crash, crack, thunder ; kuruk, the clucking of a hen; karkarānā, to crackle like oil in boiling; kirkirānā, to gnash the teeth ; kurkurānā, to cluck, to grumble. To craunch implies the exertion of greater force than when we speak of crunching such a substance as frozen snow or a biscuit. The change through the three vowels, i, a, u, in German, is very common. The Bremisch Dictionary describes knaks, kniks, knuks, as representing the sound made when something breaks; knaks, of a loud strong sound; kniks, of something fine and thin, like a glass or the chain in a watch ; knuks, when it gives a dull sound like a joint dislocated or springing back. In the same way we have knarren, to creak; knirren, to grate the teeth; knurren, to growl, grumble; garren, girren, gurren, to jar, coo, rumble, &c. Sometimes the expression is modified by a change of the consonant instead of the vowel. Thus in Zulu the sonants b and g are exchanged for the lighter sound of the spirants p and k in order to strengthen the force of a word. Pefuxela, to pant ; befuzela, to pant violently (Colenso). But perhaps the expressive power of a word is brought home to us in the most striking manner when the same signification is rendered by identical or closely similar forms in widely distant languages.
The noise of pieces of metal striking together, or of bells ringing, is represented in Manchu by the syllables *kiling-kiling, kiling-kalang*, to be compared with G. *kling-kling*, the tingling sound of a little bell (Ludwig); *kling-klang*, the sound of a stringed instrument, the clink of glasses; Lat. *clango*, E. *clank, clink*. Manchu *kalar-kilir*, for the clinking of keys or tinkling of bells, is identical with G. *klirren*, the gingling of glasses, chinking of coin, clash of arms. Manchu *tang-tang*, Chinese *tsiang-tsiang*, for the ringing of bells, correspond to E. *ding-dong*, and illustrate the imitative nature of *tingle, jingle, jangle*. Manchu *quar-quar*, for the croaking of frogs, agrees with G. *quarren*, to croak; Manchu *hak* for the sound of coughing or clearing the throat, with our expression of hawking or of a hacking cough. Manchu *pour-pour* represents the sound of boiling water, or the bubbling up of a spring, corresponding in E. to the purling of a brook, or to Du. *borrelen*, to bubble up. Manchu *kaka*, as Fr. *caca* and Finnish *áákká*, are applied to the excrements of children, while *cacá* is used in E. nurseries as an exclamation of disgust or reprobation, indicating the origin of Gr. *κακός*, bad. Manchu *tchout-chou-tchatcha*, for the sound of privy whispering, brings us to Fr. *chuchoter*, for *chut-chut-er*, to say *chut, chut*, to whisper. The whispering of the wind is represented in Chinese by the syllables *siao-siao* (Müller, I. 368), answering to the Scotch *sough* or *sooch*. The imitative syllable which represents the purling of a spring of water in the name of the Arabian well Zemzem, expresses the sound of water beginning to boil in E. *simmer*. The syllables *bil-bil*, which represent a ringing sound in Galla *bilbil-goda* (to make *bilbil*), to ring or jingle, and *bilbila*, a bell, are applied to the notes of a singing bird or a pipe in Albanian *bilbil*, a nightingale, a boy's whistle, Turk. *bülbül*, a nightingale. The sound of champing with the jaws in eating is imitated by nearly the same syllables in Galla *djamdjamgoda* (to make *djamdjam*), Magyar *csamm-ogni, csam-csogni*, and E. *champ*. The Turcoman *haláidlác'h*, uproar, disturbance (F. Newman), has its analogues in E. *hullabaloo* and Sanscr. *hala-halá-çabda* (*çabda*, sound), shout, tumult, noise. The E. *pitapat* may be compared with Australian *pitapitata*, to knock, to pelt as rain, Manchu *patapata*, Hindustani *bhadbhad* for the sound of fruits pattering down from trees, Fr. *patatras* for the clash of falling things, Maori *pata*, drops of rain (Tylor, Prim. Cult. i. 192). The Galla *gigiteka*, to giggle, is based on the same imitation as the E. word, and the same may be said of Zulu *kala*, cry, wail, sing as a bird, sound, compared with Gr. *καλέω*, and E. *call*; as of Tamil *muro-muro* and E. *murmur*. The Australian represents the thud of a spear or a bullet striking the object by the syllable *toop*, corresponding to which we have Galla *tub-djeda* (to say *tub*), for a box on the ear; Sanscr. *tup, tubh*, and Gr. *τυπ* (in *τύπτω, τύπτορ*), to strike. The imitation of the same kind of sound by a nasal intonation gives the name of the Indian *tomtom*, and Gr. *τύμπανον*, a drum; Galla *tuma*, to beat, *tumtu*, a workman, especially one who beats, a smith. The Chinook jargon uses the same imitative syllable in *tumtum*, the heart; *tumwata*, a water- * 'Mme P. bent her head, and her heart went thump, thump, at an accelerated note.'
Member for Paris, 1871.

fall, and it is also found in Lat. tum-ultus, W. tymmestl, disturbance, in E. thump, AS. tumbian (to beat the ground), to dance, and Fr. tomber, to fall.

The list of such agreements might be lengthened to any extent. But although the resemblance of synonymous words in unrelated languages affords a strong presumption in favour of an imitative origin, it must not be supposed that the most striking dissimilarity is any argument whatever to the contrary. The beating of a drum is represented in E. by rubadub, answering to G. brum-brum, Fr. rataplan or rantanplan, It. tarapatan, parapatapan. We represent the sound of knocking at a door by rat-tat-tat-tat, for which the Germans have poch-poch or puk-puk (Sanders). We use bang, the Germans puff, and the French pouf, for the report of a gun. Mr Tylor indeed denies that the syllable puff here imitates the actual sound or bang of the gun, but he has perhaps overlooked the constant tendency of language to signify the sound of a sudden puff of wind and of the collision of solid bodies by the same syllables. The It. buffetto signifies as well a buffet or cuff, as a puff with the mouth or a pair of bellows. So in Fr. we have souffler, to blow, and soufflet, a box on the ear or a pair of bellows, while E. blow is applied as well to the force of the wind as to a stroke with a solid body.

The use of G. puff, to represent the sound of a blow or of an explosion is universally recognised by the dictionaries. ' Der puff, the sound of a blow or shock; bang, blow, thump.'—Nohden.

No doubt the comparison of vocal utterances with natural sounds is slippery ground, and too many cases may be adduced where an imitative origin has been maintained on such fanciful grounds as to throw ridicule on the general theory, or has been claimed for words which can historically be traced to antecedent elements. Nevertheless, it is easy in every language to make out numerous lists of words to the imitative character of which there will in nine cases out of ten be an all but universal agreement. Such are bump, thump, plump, thwack, whack, smack, crack, clack, clap, flap, flop, pop, snap, rap, tap, pat, clash, crash, smash, swash, splash, slash, lash, dash, craunch, crunch, douse, souse, whizz, fizz, hiss, whirr, hum, boom, whine, din, ring, bang, twang, clang, clank, clink, chink, jingle, tingle, tinkle, creak, squeak, squeal, squall, rattle, clatter, chatter, patter, mutter, murmur, gargle, gurgle, guggle, sputter, splutter, paddle, dabble, bubble, blubber, rumble.

Notwithstanding the evidence of forms like these, the derivation of words from direct imitation, without the intervention of orthodox roots, is revolting to the feelings of Professor Müller, who denounces the lawlessness of doctrines that 'would undo all the work that has been done by Bopp, Humboldt, and Grimm, and others during the last fifty years—and throw etymology back into a state of chronic anarchy.' 'If it is once admitted that all words must be traced back to definite roots, according to the strictest phonetic rules, it matters little whether those roots are called phonetic types, more or less preserved in the innumerable impressions taken from them, or whether we call them onomatopoeic and interjectional. As long as we have definite forms between ourselves and chaos, we may build our science like an arch of a bridge, that rests on the firm piles fixed in the rushing waters. If, on the contrary, the roots of language are mere abstractions, and there is nothing to separate language from cries and interjections, then we may play with language as children play with the sands of the sea, but we must not complain if every fresh tide wipes out the little castles we had built on the beach.'—2nd Series, p. 94.

If Grimm and Bopp had established an immovable barrier between us and chaos, it might save some trouble of thought, but the name of no master of the Art will now guarantee the solidity of the ground on which we build; we must take it at our own risk though Aristotle himself had said it. The work of every man has to stand the brunt of water and of fire, and if wood, hay, or stubble is found in the building of Grimm or Bopp, or of any meaner name, it is well that it be burnt up.

We come now to the personal interjections, exclamations intended to make known affections of the mind, by imitation of the sounds naturally uttered under the influence of the affection indicated by the interjection. Thus ah!, the interj. of grief, is an imitation of a sigh; ugh!, the interj. of horror, of an utterance at the moment of shuddering.

At the first beginning of life, every little pain, or any unsatisfied want, in the infant, are made known by an instinctive cry. But the infant speedily finds that his cry brings his mother to his side, that he has only to raise his voice in order to get taken up and soothed or fed. He now cries no longer on the simple impulsion of instinct, but with intelligence of the consolation which follows, and it is practically found that the child of the unoccupied mother, who has time to attend to every little want of her nurseling, cries more than that of the hard-working woman whose needs compel her to leave her children a good deal to themselves. In the former case the infant gives expression in the natural way to all his wants and feelings of discomfort, and wilfully enforces the utterance as a call for the consolation he desires. But when the infant petulantly cries as a call for his mother, he makes no nearer approach to speech than the dog or the cat which comes whining to its master to get the door opened for it. The purpose of the cry, in the case of the animal or of the infant, is simply to call the attention of the mother or the master, without a thought of symbolising to them, by the nature of the cry, the kind of action that is desired of them. It is not until the child becomes dimly conscious of the thoughts of his mother, and cries for the purpose of making her suppose that he is in pain, that he has taken the first step in rational speech. The utterance of a cry with such a purpose may be taken as the earliest type of interjectional expression, the principle of which is clearly enounced by Lieber in his account of Laura Bridgman, formerly cited.

' Crying, wringing the hands, and uttering plaintive sounds, are the spontaneous symphenomena of despair. He in whom they appear does not intentionally produce them. He however who beholds them, knows them, because they are spontaneous, and because he is endowed with the same nature and organisation; and thus they become signs of despair. Henceforth rational beings may intentionally produce them when they desire to convey the idea of despair.'

The principle which gives rise to interjections is precisely the same as that which has been so largely illustrated in the naming of animals. If I wish to make a person of an unknown language think of a cow, I imitate the lowing of the animal; and in the same way when I wish him to know that I am in pain, or to think of me as suffering pain, I imitate the cry which is the natural expression of suffering. And as the utterance used in the designation of animals speedily passes from the imitative to the conventional stage, so it is with the interjections used to express varieties of human passion, which are frequently so toned down in assuming an articulate form as to make us wholly lose sight of the instinctive action which they represent, and from whence they draw their significance.

The nature of interjections has been greatly misunderstood by Müller, who treats them as spontaneous utterances, and accordingly misses their importance in illustrating the origin of language. He says, 'Two theories have been started to solve the problem [of the ultimate nature of roots], which for shortness' sake I shall call the Bowwow theory and the Poohpooh theory. According to the first, roots are imitations of sounds; according to the second, they are involuntary interjections.'—ist Series, p. 344. And again, 'There are no doubt in every language interjections, and some of them may become traditional, and enter into the composition of words. But these interjections are only the outskirts of real language. Language begins where interjections end. There is as much difference between a real word such as to laugh, and the interjection ha! ha! as there is between the involuntary act and noise of sneezing and the verb to sneeze.' 'As in the case of onomatopoeia, it cannot be denied that with interjections too some kind of language might have been formed; but not a language like that which we find in numerous varieties among all the races of men. One short interjection may be more powerful, more to the point, more eloquent than a long speech. In fact, interjections, together with gestures, the movements of the muscles, of the mouth, and the eye, would be quite sufficient for all purposes which language answers with the majority of mankind. Yet we must not forget that hum! ugh! tut! pooh! are as little to be called words as the expressive gestures which usually accompany these exclamations.'—p. 369—371. And to the same effect he cites from Horne Tooke. 'The dominion of speech is founded on the downfall of interjections. Without the artful intervention of language mankind would have had nothing but interjections with which to communicate orally any of their feelings. The neighing of a horse, the lowing of a cow, the barking of a dog, the purring of a cat, sneezing, coughing, groaning, shrieking, and every other involuntary convulsion with oral sound, have almost as good a title to be called parts of speech as interjections have. Voluntary interjections are only employed where the suddenness and vehemence of some affection or passion return men to their natural state and make them forget the use of speech, or when from some circumstance the shortness of time will not permit them to exercise it.'—Diversions of Purley, p. 32. 'When the words of Tooke are cited in opposition to the claims of interjections to be considered as parts of speech, it should be remembered, that to say that the cries of beasts have almost as good a title to the name of language as interjections, is practically to recognise that some additional function is performed by interjections, and the difference thus hazily recognised by Tooke is, in truth, the fundamental distinction between instinctive utterance and rational speech.

The essence of rational speech lies in the intention of the speaker to impress something beyond the mere sound of the utterance on the mind of the hearer. And it is precisely this which distinguishes interjections from instinctive cries. It is not speaking when a groan of agony is wrung from me, but when I imitate a groan by the interjection ah! for the purpose of obtaining the sympathy of my hearer, then speech begins. So, when I am humming and hawing, I am not speaking, but when I cry hm! to signify that I am at a loss what to say, it is not the less language because my meaning is expressed by a single syllable. It is purely accident that the syllables haha, by which we interjectionally represent the sound of laughter, have not been retained in the sense of laugh in the grammatical part of our language, as is actually the case in some of the North American dialects, for example, in the name of Longfellow's heroine Minnehaha, explained as signifying the laughing water. The same imitation may be clearly discerned in Magy. hahota, loud laughter, in Fin. hahottaa, hohottaa, and somewhat veiled in Arab. kahkahah, Gr. καχάζω, καγχάζω, Lat. cachinno, to hawhaw or laugh loud and unrestrainedly.

Müller admits that some of our words sprang from imitation of the cries of animals and other natural sounds, and others from interjections, and thus, he says, some kind of language might have been formed, which would be quite sufficient for all the purposes which language serves with the majority of men, yet not a language like that actually spoken among men. But he does not explain in what fundamental character a language so formed would differ from our own, nor can he pretend to say that the words which originate in interjections are to be distinguished from others.

To admit the mechanism as adequate for the production of language, and yet to protest that it could not have given rise to such languages as our own, because comparatively few of the words of our languages have been accounted for on this principle, is to act as many of us may remember to have done when Scrope and Lyell began to explain the modern doctrines of Geology. We could not deny the reality of the agencies, which those authors pointed out as in constant operation at the present day on the framework of the earth, demolishing here, and there re-arranging, over areas more or less limited; but we laughed at the supposition that these were the agencies by which the entire crust of the earth was actually moulded into its present form. Yet these prejudices gradually gave way under patient illustrations of the doctrine, and it came to be seen by every one that if the powers indicated by Lyell and his fellow-workers could have produced the effects attributed to them, by continued operation through unlimited periods of time, it would be unreasonable to seek for the cause of the phenomena in miracle or in convulsions of a kind of which we have no experience in the history of the world. And so in the case of language, when once a rational origin of words has been established on the principle of imitation, the critical question should be, whether the words explained on this principle are a fair specimen of the entire stock, whether there is any cognisable difference between them and the rest of language; and not, what is the numerical proportion of the two classes, whether the number of words traced to an imitative origin embraces a fiftieth or a fifth of the roots of language.

There can be no better key to the condition of mind in which the use of speech would first have begun, than the language of gesture in use among the deaf-and-dumb, which has been carefully studied by Mr Tylor, and admirably described in his ' Early History of Mankind.' ' The Gesture-language and Picture-writing,' he says, ' insignificant as they are in practice in comparison with speech and phonetic writing, have this great claim to consideration, that we can really understand them as thoroughly as perhaps we can understand anything, and by studying them we can realise to ourselves in some measure a condition of the human mind which underlies anything which has as yet been traced in even the lowest dialect of language, if taken as a whole. Though, with the exception of words which are evidently imitative, like peewit and cuckoo, we cannot at present tell by what steps man came to express himself by words, we can at least see how he still does come to express himself by signs and pictures, and so get some idea of the nature of this great movement, which no lower animal is known to have made or shown the least sign of making.'

'The Gesture-language is in great part a system of representing objects and ideas by a rude outline-gesture, imitating their most striking features. It is, as has been well said by a deaf-and-dumb man, a Picture-language. Here at once its essential difference from speech becomes evident. Why the words stand and go mean what they do is a question to which we cannot as yet give the shadow of an answer, and if we had been taught to say stand where we now say go, and go where we now say stand, it would be practically all the same to us. No doubt there was a sufficient reason for these words receiving the meanings they now bear, but so far as we are concerned there might as well have been none, for we have quite lost sight of the connection between the word and idea. But in the Gesture-language the relation between idea and sign not only always exists, but is scarcely lost sight of for a moment. When a deaf-and-dumb child holds his two first fingers forked like a pair of legs, and makes them stand and walk upon the table, we want no teaching to tell us what this means nor why it is done. The mother-tongue (so to speak) of the deaf-and-dumb is the language of signs. The evidence of the best observers tends to prove that they are capable of developing the Gesture-language out of their own minds without the aid of speaking men. The educated deaf-mutes can tell us from their own experience how Gesture-signs originate.

The following account is given by Kruse, a deaf-mute himself, and a well-known teacher of deaf-mutes, and author of several works of no small ability :— 'Thus the deaf-and-dumb must have a language without which no thought can be brought to pass. But here nature soon comes to his help. What strikes him most, or what makes a distinction to him between one thing and another, such distinctive signs of objects are at once signs by which he knows these objects, and knows them again; they become tokens of things. And whilst he silently elaborates the signs he has found for single objects, that is, whilst he describes their forms for himself in the air, or imitates them in thought with hands, fingers, and gestures, he developes for himself suitable signs to represent ideas, which serve him as a means of fixing ideas of different kinds in his mind, and recalling them to his memory. And thus he makes himself a language, the so-called Gesture-language, and with these few scanty and imperfect signs a way for thought is already broken, and with his thought, as it now opens out, the language cultivates itself, and forms further and further.'

Mr Tylor proceeds to describe some of the signs used in the Deaf-and-Dumb Institution at Berlin : —

' To express the pronouns I, thou, he, I push my fore-finger against the pit of my stomach for I, push it towards the person addressed for thou, point with my thumb over my right shoulder for he. When I hold my right hand flat with the palm down at the level of my waist, and raise it towards the level of my shoulder, that signifies great; but if I depress it instead, it means little. The sign for man is taking off the hat; for child, the right elbow is dandled upon the left hand. The adverb hither and the verb to come have the same sign, beckoning with the finger towards oneself. To hold the first two fingers apart, like a letter V, and dart the finger tips out from the eyes is to see. To touch the ear and tongue with the forefinger is to hear, and to taste. To speak is to move the lips as in speaking, and to move the lips thus while pointing with the fore-finger out from the mouth is name, or to name, as though one should define it to point out by speaking. To pull up a pinch of flesh from the back of one's hand is flesh or meat. Make the steam curling up from it with the forefinger, and it becomes roast meat. Make a bird's bill with two fingers in front of one's lips and flap with the arms, and that means goose; put the first sign and these together, and we have roast goose. To seize the most striking outline of an object, the principal movement of an action, is the whole secret, and this is what the rudest savage can do untaught, nay, what is more, can do better and more easily than the educated man.'

In the Institutions, signs are taught for many abstract terms, such as when or yet, or the verb to be, but these, it seems, are essentially foreign to the nature of the Gesture-language, and are never used by the children among themselves. The Gesture-language has no grammar, properly so called. The same sign stands for the agent, his action, and the act itself, for walk, walkest, walked, walker, the particular sense in which the sign is to be understood having to be gathered from the circumstances of the case. ' A look of inquiry converts an assertion into a question, and fully serves to make the difference between The master is come, and Is the master come ? The interrogative pronouns who ? what ? are made by looking or pointing about in an inquiring manner; in fact, by a number of unsuccessful attempts to say, he, that. The deaf-and-dumb child's way of asking, Who has beaten you? would be, You beaten; who was it?' Where the inquiry is of a more general nature, a number of alternatives are suggested. 'The deaf-and-dumb child does not ask, What did you have for dinner yesterday? but, Did you have soup? did you have porridge? and so forth.—What is expressed by a genitive case or a corresponding preposition may have a distinct sign of holding in the Gesture-language. The three signs to express the gardener's knife, might be the knife, the garden, and the action of grasping the knife, putting it into his pocket, or something of the kind. But the mere putting together of the possessor and possessed may answer the purpose.'

The vocal signs used at the first commencement of speech would differ from the gestures which they supplemented or replaced only in being addressed to the ear instead of the eye. Each separate utterance would be designed to lead the hearer to the thought of some scene of existence or sensible image associated with the sound which the utterance is intended to represent, and it might be used to signify a substantive object, or a quality, or action, according to the circumstances of the case. The deaf-mute touches his lip to signify either the lip itself or the colour red, and the word lip might equally have been used in both these senses, as, in fact, the term pink is applied indifferently to a particular flower and a mixture of white and red, or orange to a certain fruit and its peculiar colour. An imitation of the sound of champing with the jaws might with equal propriety signify either something to eat or the act of eating, and on this principle we have above explained the origin of words like mum or nim, which may occasionally be heard in our nurseries expressing indifferently the senses of eat or of food. Nor is this comprehensiveness of signification confined to the self-developed language of children. In ordinary English the same word may often be used in such a construction as to make it either verb or noun, substantive or adjective, or sometimes interjection or adverb also. When I speak of going to hunt or to fish, grammarians would call the word a verb. When I speak of joining the hunt or catching fish, it is a substantive. In the expression of a hunt-ball or fish-dinner the prior element is used to qualify the meaning of the following noun, and thus performs the part of an adjective. The syllable bang represents a loud dull sound, and when it is uttered simply for the purpose of giving rise to the thought of such a sound, as when I say, Bang! went the gun, it is called an interjection. But when it is meant to indicate the action of a certain person, as when I say, Do not bang the door, it is a verb. When it expresses the subject or the object of action, as in the sentence, He gave the door a bang, it is a noun. When I say, He ran bang up against the wall, bang qualifies the meaning of the verb ran, and so is an adverb. But these grammatical distinctions depend entirely upon the use, in other instances or in other languages, of appropriate modifications of the significant syllable, whether by additions or otherwise, in expressing such relations as those indicated above. The office of all words at the beginning of speech, like that of the Interjections at the present day, would be simply to bring to mind a certain object of thought, and it would make no difference in the nature of the word whether that object was an agent, or an act, or a passive scene of existence. The same word

Moo would serve to designate the lowing of the cow or the cow itself. It is only when a word, signifying an attribute of this person or of that, coalesces with the personal pronouns, or with elements expressing relations of time, that the verb will begin to emerge as a separate kind of word from the rest of speech. In the same way the coalescence with elements indicating that the thing signified is the subject or the object of action, or expressing the direction of motion to or from the thing, or some relation between it and another object, will give rise to the class of nouns. We have in Chinese an example of a language in which neither verb nor noun has yet been developed, but every syllable presents an independent image to the mind, the relations of which are only marked by the construction of the sentence, so that the same word may signify under different circumstances what would be expressed by a verb, a noun, or an adjective in an inflectional language. The syllable ta conveys the idea of something great, and may be used in the sense of great, greatness, and to be great. Thus ta fu signifies a great man; Jü ta, the man is great.—Müller I. 255. The sense of in a place is expressed in Chinese by adding such words as cung, middle, or nei, inside, as kuo cung, in the empire. The instrumental relation is indicated by the syllable y, which is an old word meaning use; as y ting (use stick), with a stick. It is universally supposed that the case-endings of nouns in Greek, Latin, and Sanscrit have arisen from the coalescence of some such elements as the above, as in the case of our own compounds, whereto, whereof, wherefore, whereby, wherewith, the subsidiary element being slurred over in pronunciation, and gradually worn down until all clue to its original form and signification has been wholly lost. It is otherwise with the personal inflections of the verbs, whose descent from the personal pronouns is in many cases clear enough.

Interjections are of the same simple significance as the words in Chinese, or as all words must have been at the first commencement of speech. Their meaning is complete in itself, not implying a relation to any other conception. The purpose of the interjection is simply to present a certain object to the imagination of the hearer, leaving him to connect it with the ideas suggested by any preceding or following words, as if successive scenes of visible representation were brought before his eyes. The term is chiefly applied to exclamations intended to express a variety of mental or bodily affections, pain, grief, horror, contempt, wonder, &c., by imitating some audible accompaniment of the affection in question. Thus the notion of pain or grief is conveyed by an imitation of a sigh or a groan; the idea of dislike and rejection by an imitation of the sound of spitting. The interjection will be completely accounted for in an etymological point of view, when it is traced to a recognised symphenomenon (as Lieber calls it) of the affection, that is, to some outward display of the affection, that admits of audible representation. Why the affection should display itself in such a manner is a question beyond the bounds of etymological inquiry, but is often self-evident, as in the case of spitting as a sign of dislike.

The interjections which occupy the most prominent place in the class are perhaps those which represent a cry of pain, a groan, a sigh of oppression and grief. Such are g. ach, Gael. ach, och, ochan, w. och, e. ah, oh, It. ai, ahi, ohi, Gr. οἴ, ὤ, Lat. ah, oh, oi, hei, Illyr. jao, jaoh. A widespread form, representing probably a deeper groan, is seen in Gr. οὐαί, Lat. væ. It. guai, w. gwae, Illyr. vaj, Goth. wai, ohg. ui, wewa, as. wá, wáwa, e. woe, on. vei.

The representation of a sigh or groan by the syllable ah! ah! assumes the shape of a substantive or a verb in w. och, ochan, g. ach, a groan or lamentation; Ir. ochain, ochain, G. achen, ächzen, to groan, Gr. ἄχομαι, to bewail oneself, ἀκαχίζω (to cry ach! ach!) ἀχέω, ἀχνυμαι, to grieve, to mourn. It passes on to signify the cause of the groaning in as. ace, æce, e. ache, pain, suffering, and in Gr. ἄχος, pain, grief. The form corresponding to Lat. væ, however, has more generally been used in the construction of words signifying pain, grief, misery. G. weh, pain, grief, affliction; die wehen, the pangs of childbirth; kopfweh, zahnweh, headache, toothache; wehen (Schmeller), to ache, to hurt; Let. wai-idt, to injure; Illyrian vaj, w. gwae; It. guajo, misfortune, woe.

It is very common in an early stage of speech to form verbs by the addition of elements signifying say or make to an imitative syllable. Thus in the language of the Gallas the sound of a crack is represented by the syllables cacak (where c stands for a click with the tongue); the chirping of birds by the syllable tirr or trrr; the champing of the jaws by djamdjam; and cacak djeda (to say cacak) is to crack; tirr-djeda, to chirp; djamdjam goda (goda, to make), to smack or make a noise as swine in eating. A similar formation is frequent in Sanscrit, and is found in G. weh schreien, weh klagen, to cry woe! to lament; wehthun, to do woe, to cause pain, to ache. A more artificial way of expressing action is to replace the elements signifying say or make by the sound of an l, n, or r, in Gr. mostly a ζ, at the close of the radical syllable. Thus the Latin has la-l-are, to cry laa! the Piedmontese, far lau-lau, and more artificially lau-l-e, to make bow-wow, to bark; Fr. miau-l-er, to cry miau! Albanian miau-l-is, miau-n-is, I mew; Gr. αἰάζω, to cry αἴ, αἴ, to lament, οἰμώζω, to cry οἴμοι, ah me! γαργαρίζω, to sound γαργαρ, to gargle. In this way from the root guai, wai, representing a cry of pain, are formed E. wai-l. It. guaj-ire, guaj-ol-ire, to yell or cry out pitifully, to lament, Bret. gwe-l-a, to weep, N. vei-a, ON. vei-n-a (to cry vei!), to yell, howl, lament, G. weinen, to weep.

We get a glimpse of the original formation of verbs in the way in which the interjection sometimes coalesces with the personal pronoun. The utterance of the interjection alone would naturally express the pain or grief of the speaker himself, but when joined with the mention of another person, the exclamation would refer with equal clearness to the suffering of the person designated. Væ tibi! Væ victis! Woe unto thee! Woe unto them! Accordingly, when the speaker wishes emphatically to indicate himself as the sufferer, he adds the pronoun of the first person. Hei mihi! Ah me! Aye me! Sp. Ay di me! Gr. οἴμοι. It. ohimè! oimè! Illyr. vaj me! Let. waiman! woe is me. And so complete is the coalescence of the interjection and the pronoun in some of these cases, as to give rise to the formation of verbs like a simple root. Thus from οἴμοι springs οἰμώζω, to wail, lament; from oimè, oimare, to wail or cry alas

(Florio) ; from Let. waiman ! waimanas, lamentation, waimandî, to lament, showing the formation of the oe. waiment, of the same signification. Now if we examine the purport of the utterance ohimé ! ah me ! we shall see that it is intended to let the hearer know that the speaker is in pain or grief, and thus has essentially the same meaning with the Gr. ἄχομαι I bemoan myself, I cry ach ! I am in pain. And no one doubts that the μαι of ἄχομαι is the pronoun of the first person joined on to an element signifying lamentation or pain, a notion which is expressed in the clearest manner by a syllable like ἄχ or ach, representing a cry of pain.

The interjection in Italian coalesces also with the pronoun of the second and third person : ohitû ! alas for thee, ohisê ! alas for him (Florio), suffering to thee, to him, corresponding to Gr. ἄχεσαι, ἄχεται, although in these last the identity of the verbal terminations with the personal pronoun is not so clearly marked as in the case of the first person of the verb.

UGH !
The effects of cold and fear on the human frame closely resemble each other. They check the action of the heart and depress the vital powers, producing a convulsive shudder, under which the sufferer cowers together with his arms pressed against his chest, and utters a deep guttural cry, the vocal representation of which will afford a convenient designation of the attitude, mental or bodily, with which it is associated. Hence, in the first place, the interjection ugh! (in German uh! hu! in French ouf!) expressive of cold or horror, and commonly pronounced with a conscious imitation of the sound which accompanies a shudder. Then losing its imitative character the representative syllable appears under the form of ug or hug, as the root of verbs and adjectives indicating shuddering and horror. Kilian has huggheren, to shudder or shiver. The oe. ug or houge was used in the sense of shudder at, feel abhorrence at.

The rattling drum and trumpet's tout Delight young swankies that are stout ; What his kind frighted mother ugs Is musick to the sodger's lugs.—Jamieson, Sc. Diet.

In a passage of Hardyng cited by Jamieson it is related how the Abbess of Cold-inghame, having cut off her own nose and lips for the purpose of striking the Danish ravishers with horror,— ' Counselled all her systers to do the same To make their foes to houge so with the sight.
And so they did, afore the enemies came Eche-on their nose and overlip full right Cut off anon, which was an hougly sight.
' Here, as Jamieson observes, the passage clearly points out the origin of the word ugly as signifying what causes dread or abhorrence, or (carrying the derivation to its original source) what makes us shudder and cry ugh!
Ugh! the odious ugly fellow.—Countess of St Albans.

It may be observed that we familiarly use frightful, or dreadfully ugly, for the extreme of ugliness. The radical syllable is compounded with a different termin-ation in Scotch ugsome, what causes horror.

The ugsomeness and silence of the nycht In every place my sprete made sore aghast.—Douglas, Virgil.
From the same root are ON. ugga, to fear, to have apprehension of; uggr, fright, apprehension; uggligr, frightful, threatening; uggsamr, timorous. Then as things of extraordinary size have a tendency to strike us with awe and terror, to make us houge at them (in the language of Hardyng), the term huge is used to signify excessive size, a fearful size. The connection of the cry with a certain bodily attitude comes next into play, and the word hug is applied to the act of pressing the arms against the breast, which forms a prominent feature in the shudder of cold or horror, and is done in a voluntary way in a close embrace or the like.

GR. βᾶβαι! LAT. BABÆ! PAPÆ!
The manifestation of astonishment or absorption in intent observation, by the instinctive opening of the mouth, is familiar to every one.

I saw a smith stand with his hammer—thus, The whilst his iron did on his anvil cool, With open mouth swallowing a tailor's news.—K. John.
The physical cause of the phenomenon appears to be, that the least exertion in breathing interferes with the power of catching any very slight sounds for which we are listening; and as we breathe with greater ease with the mouth open, when we are intently engaged in the observation of an object of apprehension or wonder, listening for every sound that may proceed from it, the mouth instinct-ively opens in order to calm down the function of breathing, and to give the fairest play to the sense of hearing. Now the exertion of the voice at the moment of opening the lips produces the syllable ha, which is found as the root of words in the most distant languages signifying wonder, intently observe, watch, expect, wait, remain, endure, or (passing from the mental to the bodily phenomenon) gape or open the mouth, and thence open in general. The repetition of the syl-lable ha, ha, gives the interjection of wonder in Greek and Latin, βᾶβαι! babae! papae! The exclamation ba! is used in the North of France in a similar manner, according to Hecart (Dict. Rouchi),—and the same author explains babaie as one who stares with open mouth, a gaping booby. Walloon bawi, to gaze with open mouth (Grandgagnage); esbawi. Old English abaw, Fr. ébahir, abauhir, to cause to cry ba! to set agape, to astonish.

In himself was all his state More solemn than the tedious pomp which waits On princes, when their rich retinue long Of horses led and grooms besmeared with gold, Dazzles the crowd, and sets them all agape.—Milton.
In the remote Zulu we find babaza, to astonish. The significant syllable is strengthened by a final d in several of the Romance dialects (' the d being in ancient Latin the regular stopgap of the hiatus.'—Quart. Rev. No. 148), as in It. ladare, to be intent upon, to watch, to loiter, tarry, stay ; stare a lada, to observe, to watch, to wait ; sbadigliare, Provençal badalhar, to yawn ; badar, to open the mouth, gola badada, with open mouth ; pouerto badiero, an open door ; Fr. lader, to open (Vocab. de Berri), badault (badaud), a gaping hoyden, a fool (Cot.) ; Catalan badia, Portuguese bahia, an opening where the sea runs up into the land, a bay ; Breton badalein, to yawn ; bada, badaoui, to be stupified, dazzled, astonished. In France the simpler form of the root, without the addition of the final d, gives Old Fr. baer, baier, béer, to be intent upon, to hanker after, to gape ; bouche béante, à gueule bée, with open mouth ; bailler, to gape or yawn. Abaier is explained by Lacombe, ' écouter avec étonnement, bouche béante, inhiare loquenti.' The adoption of Fr. abaier gave rise to E. abeyance, expectation, suspense, and OE. abie, to remain, abide, endure.

At sight of her they sudden all arose In great amaze, ne wist which way to chuse.
But Jove all fearless forced them to abie.—F. Queen.

The same transition from the sense of earnest observation to that of expectation or mere endurance until a certain end, is seen in Latin attendere, to observe, to direct the mind to, and Fr. attendre, to expect, to wait ; and again in Italian guatare, to look, to watch, compared with E. wait, which is radically identical and was itself originally used in the sense of look.

Beryn clepyd a maryner, and bad hym sty on loft, And weyte aftir our four shippis aftir us doith dryve.

As the vowel of the root is thinned down from a to i in the series baer, baier, abaier, aby, or in Gr. (χάω) χαίνω, χάσκω, compared with Lat. hio, to gape, we learn to recognise a similar series in It. badare, Gothic beidan, to look out for, to expect, await, and E. bide, abide, to wait.

HUSH ! HIST !
A representation of a whispering or rustling sound by the utterance of a prolonged sh or ss, or of different combinations of s with h, p, or t, is widely used for the purpose of demanding silence or cessation of noise, or of warning one to listen. Hence the interjections of silence, hush ! hist ! whist ! pist ! (Hal.), Sc. whish ! whisht ! G. ps ! psch ! pst ! husch ! tusch ! Da. tys ! Sw. tyst ! Lat. st ! It. zitto, Piedm. cito ! ciuto ! Fr. chut ! Turk. sūsā ! Ossetic ss ! sos ! silence! Fernandian sia ! listen! tush! Yoruba sio ! pshaw! (Tylor, Prim. Cult. I. 178.)

The interjection seems in all cases to arise from a representation of a low whispering sound, but the principle on which it acts as a demand of silence may be explained in two ways. In the first place it may be understood as an exhortation to lower the voice to a whisper, or more urgently, not to let even a whisper or a rustle be heard ; but more generally perhaps it is to be understood as an inintimation to be on the watch for the least whisper that can be heard, for which purpose it is necessary that the hearer should keep perfectly still. Thus we have Sc. whish, whush, a rushing or whizzing sound, a whisper.—Jam.
Let her yelp on, be you as calm's a mouse.
Nor let your whisht be heard into the house.
The It. zitto is used exactly in the same way; non fare zitto, not to make the least sound; non sentirse un zitto, not a breath to be heard; stare zitto, to be silent. Pissipissi, pst, hsht, still; also a low whispering; pissipissare, to psh, to hsht; also to buzz or whisper very low.—Fl. To pister or whister are provincially used in the sense of whisper.—Hal. The w. hust (pronounced hist), a buzzing noise, hush (Rhys), husting, whisper, speak low, correspond to E. hist! silence! listen! In the same way answering to G. tusch! Da. tys! hush! the G. has tuschen, tuscheln, to whisper; zischen, zischeln, zischeln, to hiss, whizz, fizz, whisper. G. husch! represents any slight rustling sound, the sound of moving quickly through the air. 'Husch! sausen wir husch! Auch rusch und durch Busch.' 'Husch! was rauscht dort in den Gebüschen.' In this last example it will be seen that the interjection may be understood either as a representation of the rustling sound that is heard in the bushes, or as an intimation to listen to it. The Gr. σίζω, to give the sound σι, to hiss, signifies also, to cry hush! to command silence, showing that the syllable σι, like the Fernandian sia! was used in the sense of hush. Hence must be explained Lat. sileo, Goth. silan (formed on the plan of Lat. la-l-o, to cry haa), to be hushed or silent. In Gr. σιγάω, to be silent, σιγάζω, to put to silence, the root has the form of E. sigh, representing the sound of a deep-drawn breath, or the whispering of the wind. In like manner the Sc. souch, sugh, swouch, souf, OE. swough, Magy. sug-, suh-, representing the sound of the wind, or of heavy breathing, lead to Sc. souch, silent, calm. To keep a calm souch; to keep souch, to keep silent.—Jam. Hence AS. suwian, swugan, swigan, G. schweigen, to be silent. The syllable representing a whispering sound is sometimes varied by the introduction of an l after the initial w, f, or h. Thus from forms like whisper (G. wispern, wispeln), whister, pister, whist! hist! we pass to AS. wlisp (speaking with a whispering sound), lisping, G. flispern, flüstern, to whisper, ON. hlusta, to listen, AS. hlyst, gehlyst, the sense of hearing. The primitive mute then falls away, leaving the initial l alone remaining, as in G. lispeln, to whisper, also to lisp; Du. luysteren, to whisper, as well as to listen (Kil.); E. list! synonymous with hist! hark, and thence the verb to listen.
The notion of a suppressed utterance of the voice is very generally conveyed by modifications of the syllable mu, representing the sound made with the closing lips; mu, mum, mut, muk, mus, to which are often added a rhyming accompaniment on the plan of such expressions as hugger-mugger, hubble-bubble, heller-skelter. Thus we have Gr. μύζειν μήτε γρύζειν, to say neither mu nor gru, not to utter a syllable; Lat. muttio or mutio, as E. mutter, to say mut, to utter low indistinct sounds; non muttire, non dicere muttum, to keep silence. Equivalent phrases are Fr. ne sonner mot; It. non fare ne motto ne totto (Altieri); Sp. no decir mus ni chus, ni mistar ni chislar; Du. noch mikken noch kikken; G. nicht mücken, nicht mix noch kix sagen; Swiss nicht mutz thun. The form mum may perhaps be from a repetition of the imitative syllable mu mu, as in Vei mumu, dumb. It is used by the author of Pierce Plowman in the sense of the least utterance, where, speaking of the avarice of the monks, he says that you may sooner ----mete the mist on Malvern hills Than get a mum of their mouths ere money be them shewed. Hence, by ellipse of the negative, mum ! silence ! Fr. Môm ! ne parlez plus—Palsgr. In the same way the Fr. uses mot, as, ne sonnez mot ! not a syllable !—Trevoux. With every step of the track leading up to the Lat. mutus, speechless, so clearly marked out, it is impossible to hesitate between the formation of the word in the manner indicated above, and the derivation from Sanscr. mû, to bind, maintained by Müller, and from so glaring an example we may take courage not always to regard the question as conclusively settled by the most confident production of a Sanscrit root. As the Fr. uses both môm ! and mot ! as an injunction of silence, so a person stands mum or mute when not a mum or a mut comes from his mouth. Moreover, the sense of speechlessness is expressed on the same principle in the most distant tongues. Thus from Magy. kuk, a slight sound, is formed kukkanni (identical with the Da. kikken in the expression noch mikken noch kikken), to mutter, and kuka, dumb. The Vei mumu, Mpongwe imamu, dumb, are essentially identical with our mum, silent, whence mummers, actors in dumbshow. Mr Tylor quotes also Zulu momata, to move the mouth or lips; Tahitian omumo, to murmur ; mamu, to be silent ; Fiji nomonomo, Chilian ñomn, to be silent ; Quiché mem, mute; Quichua amu, silent, dumb.—Prim. Cult. I. 185.

The ideas of silence and secresy or concealment are so closely connected, that from μύζω we readily pass to μυστήριον, the secret rites of Greek worship, whence E. mystery, something hidden from the comprehension. In the same way from the representative mus (Sp. no decir mus ni chus) we have Lat. musso, to mutter, to be silent, and thence Fr. musser, to hide ; musse, a private hoard. ‘ Cil que musce les furmens, est escommengé ès gens : qui abscondit frumenta maledicetur in populis.’ Cotgrave calls hide-and-seek the game of musse. So also from the parallel form muk must probably be explained the familiar hugger mugger, applied to what is done in secret, and mucker, to lay up a (secret) store. Exmoor mug-gard (muttering), sullen, displeased.—Halliwell. Gr. μυγμός, a muttering.

The interj. hem ! ahem ! hm ! hum ! represent the sound made in clearing the throat in order to call the attention of the hearer to the speaker. In Latin it has frequently the force of the interj. en ! (which may be merely another mode of representing the same utterance) when the speaker points to something, or does something to which he wishes to call attention. Hem! Davum tibi : Here! (pointing) there is Davus for you. Oves scabrae sunt, tam glabrae, hem, quam haec est manus :—as smooth, see here ! as this hand. When addressed to a person going away it has the effect of stopping him or calling him back. Thus Du. hem is explained by Weiland an exclamation to make a person stand still: hem ! hoor hier, hallo ! hark there. Mr Tylor notices an analogous exclamation mma ! 'hallo, stop,' in the language of Fernando Po. Then, as the notion of bringing to a stand naturally leads to that of stopping a person in something that he is doing, the interj. hem ! is used in Hesse as a prohibition to children. Hem ! hem ! Don't touch that, leave that alone. Hum ! Humme an interj. of prohibition.—Brem. Wtb. Hence hamm holln, to keep one in check, to restrain. Du sast mi woll hamm holln, you shall attend to my hem ! shall stay where I choose, do as I direct (Danneil). The conversion of the interj. into a verb gives Du. hemmen, hammen, to call back by crying hem ! (Weiland), and G. hemmen, to restrain, keep back, to stop or hinder a proceeding; together with the E. hem, to confine. 'They hem me in on every side.' A hem* is the doubling down which confines the threads of a garment and hinders them from ravelling out.

The point of greatest interest about the interj. hem is that it offers a possible, and as it seems to me a far from improbable, origin of the pronoun me, Gr. emo-, as shown in the cases ἐμοῦ, ἐμοί, ἐμέ. We have seen that the primary purpose of the interj. is to call the attention of the hearer to the presence of the person who utters the exclamation, and this, it must be observed, is precisely the office of the pronoun me, which signifies the person of the speaker. Hem is often used in Latin when the speaker turns his thoughts upon himself. Hem ! misera occidi ! Ah wretched me ! I am lost. Hem ! scio jam quid vis dicere. Let me see— I know what you would say. In the line Me, Me, adsum qui feci, in me convertite tela, we might read the passage without alteration of the meaning. Hem ! Hem ! adsum qui feci.

The use of articulations consisting mainly of the sound of m or n to signify the speaker himself, is so widely spread in every family of man, that this mode of designation must be based on some very obvious principle of significance.

In an interesting paper on the pronouns of the first and second person by Dr Lottner, in the Philological Trans. of 1859, he shows that in upwards of seventy Negro languages the pronoun of the first person is ma, me, mi, man, na, ne, nge, ngi, ni, in, with m and n as personal prefixes. And the word is formed on the same plan in almost all families of language. In the Finnic family we have Ostiac ma, Vogul am. Lap. mon ; in Turkish -m as possessive affix, as in laba-m, my father. Then again Burmese nga, Chinese ngo, Corean nai, Australian ngai, Kassia nga, Kol ing, aing, Tamul nan, Basque ni, Georgian me, and among the languages of N. and S. America, ni, ne, vo, na, miye, in, ane, ani, &c. The Bushmen of the Cape,

* Mr Tylor cites the derivation of G. hemmen, ' to stop, check, restrain,' from the interj. hem ! signifying stop ! as an obvious extravagance. There is however so close a connection in meaning between the interjection and the verb, that it is not easy to understand the grounds of the censure from the mouth of one who fully admits the legitimacy of derivation from interjections.

whose pronoun of the first person is written mm by Lichtenstein, probably retain the purest type of the expression, the principle of which appears to be the confinement of the voice within the person of the speaker, by the closure of the lips or teeth in the utterance of the sounds m, n, ng. It is certain that something of this kind is felt when we sound the voice through the nose in an inarticulate way with closed lips, in order to intimate that we are keeping our thoughts to ourselves, and are not prepared, or do not choose, to give them forth in speech. The sound which we utter on such an occasion appears in writing in the shape of the interj. hm! and as it marks the absorption of the speaker in his own thoughts, it might naturally be used to designate himself in the early lispings of language before the development of the personal pronouns; in other words, it might serve as the basis of the pronoun me. Nor is the formation of the pronoun on such a plan by any means a new suggestion.

The Grammarian Nigidius (as quoted by A. Gellius, l. x. c. 4) asserts that in pronouncing the pronoun of the first person (ego, mihi, nos), we hem in, as it were, the breath within ourselves (spiritum quasi intra nosmetipsos coercemus), and hence he conceives that the word is naturally adapted to the meaning it expresses. He probably felt the truth of the principle in the case of me, and blunder-ingly extended it to ego, in the pronunciation of which there is certainly no hemming in of the voice. It is of the nasals m, n, ng only that this character can properly be affirmed, and these, as we have seen, seem to be indifferently employed as the basis of me and its correlatives all over the globe. Plato in the Cratylus speaks of the letter n as keeping the sound within the speaker, and on that principle implicitly explains the meaning of the preposition ἔν, in, which is the mere articulation of the consonantal sound in question.

The application of an interj. signifying see here! to the sense of me, would be strictly parallel to the use of It. ci and vi, properly signifying here and there, in the sense of us and you. Other instances of a like nature are given by W. v. Humboldt in his essay on the connection between the adverbs of place and the personal pronouns. Thus in the language of Tonga, mei signifies hither, motion towards the speaker; atu, motion from the speaker to the person spoken to, and these particles are used in construction (like It. ci and vi) for me or us and you. 'Bea behe mei he tūnga fafine'=when spoke hither the several women, i. e. when several women spoke to me or us. So tāla, to tell; tāla mei, to tell hither, to tell me or us; tāla tu, to tell thither, to tell you. Here we seem to have the very forms of the Lat. pronouns me and tu, for which it is remarkable that the Tonga has totally different words, au and eoy. In Armenian there is a suffix s, which originally means this or here, but takes the meaning of I and my. Thus hair-s, this father, I a father, my father. In American slang a man speaks of himself as this child.

Another consequence of the closing of the mouth in the utterance of the sound of m or n may explain the use of those articulations in expressing rejection, refusal, negation. The earliest type of rejection is the closing of the mouth, and the aversion of the head from the proffered breast, and the inherent propriety of the symbolism is obvious. De Brosses observes that the articulations n and s, both of which he considers as nasal sounds, are naturally adapted to signify negation or contrariety, giving as examples the words infinity and It. sfortunato. He overlooks the fact, however, that this It. s is merely the remnant of a Lat. dis, and gives no other example of the supposed negative power of the letter. Moreover, the reason he suggests for attributing such a significance to the nasals is simply absurd. Of the two channels, he says (ch. xiv. § 29), by which the voice is emitted, the nose is the least used, and it changes the sound of the vowel, which adapts it for the interjection of doubt, and for the expression of the privative idea. The expression of negation by means of nasals is exemplified in Goth. ni, Lat. ne, in (in composition), Gr. μὴ, Masai (E. Africa) emme, eme, m-; Vei ma; Haussa ñ, ñ, representing a sound of which it is impossible to convey a correct idea by visible signs.—Schön. Mr Tylor cites Botocudo yna (making the loudness of the sound indicate the strength of the negation); Tupi aan, aani; Guato mau; Miranha nani; Quichua ama, manan (whence manamñi, to deny); Quiché ma, man, mana; Galla hn, hin, hm; Coptic an, emmen, en, mmn; Fernandian 'nt, all signifying not.

The most universal and direct source of pleasure in animal life is the appetite for food, and it is accordingly from this source that are taken the types used in expressing the ideas of gratification or dislike. The savage expresses his admiration and pleasure by smacking his lips or rubbing his belly, as if relishing food or rejoicing in a hearty meal; he indicates distaste and rejection by signs of spitting out a nauseous mouthful. Thus Petherick, speaking of a tribe of negroes on the Upper Nile, says, 'The astonishment and delight of these people at our display of beads was great, and was expressed by laughter and a general rubbing of their bellies.'—Egypt and the Nile, p. 448. And similar evidence is adduced by Leichardt from the remoter savages in Australia. 'They very much admired our horses and bullocks, and particularly our kangaroo-dog. They expressed their admiration by a peculiar smacking or clacking with their mouth and lips.'—Australia, p. 336.

The syllable smack, by which we represent the sound made by the lips or tongue in kissing or tasting, is used in English, Swedish, German, Polish, &c., in the sense of taste. Du. smaeck, taste; smaecklik, sweet, palatable, agreeable to the taste. In the Finnish languages, which do not admit of a double consonant at the beginning of words, the loss of the initial s gives Esthonian maggo, makko, taste; maggus, makke. Fin. makia, sweet, well-tasting; maiskia, to smack the lips; maisto, taste; maiskis, a smack, a kiss, also relishing food, delicacies. The initial s is lost also in Fris. macke, to kiss. The initial consonant is somewhat varied without impairing the imitative effect in Bohemian mlaskati, to smack in eating; mlaskanina, delicacies; and in Fin. naskia, g. knatschen, to smack with the mouth in eating, showing the origin of Lettish naschkeht, g. naschen, to be nice in eating, to love delicacies; nascherei, dainties.

Again, we have seen that Leichardt employs the syllables smack and clack as equally appropriate to represent the sound made by the tongue and palate in the enjoyment of tasty food, and in French, claquer de la langue is employed for the same purpose. We speak of a click with the tongue, though we do not happen to apply it to the smack in tasting. The Welsh has gwefusglec (gwefus, lip), a smack with the lips, a kiss. From this source then we may derive Gr. γλυκύς, sweet, analogous to Du. smaecklic, Fin. makia, from the imitative smack. The sound of an initial cl or gl is readily confounded with that of tl or dl, as some people pronounce glove, dlove, and formerly tlick was used where we now say click. Thus Cotgrave renders Fr. niquet, a tnick, tlick, snap with the fingers. The same combination is found in Boh. tlaskati, to smack in eating, tleskati, to clap hands; and Lat. stloppus, parallel with sclopus, a pop or click with the mouth. From the sound of a smack represented by the form tlick or dlick I would explain Lat. deliciae, anything one takes pleasure in, delight, darling; together with the cognate delicatus, what one smacks one's chops at, dainty, nice, agreeable, as corruptions of an earlier form, dliciae, dlicatus. And as we have supposed Gr. γλυκύς (glykys) to be derived from the form click or glick, so from tlick or dlick would be formed dlykis or dlukis (dlucis), and ultimately dulcis, sweet, the radical identity or rather parallelism of which with γλυκύς has been recognised on the principle of such an inversion. When the sound of an initial tl or dl became distasteful to Latin ears, it would be slurred over in different ways, and dlucis would pass into dulcis by inverting the places of the liquid and vowel, while the insertion of an e in dliciae, dlicatus, as in the vulgar umbrella for umbrella, would produce deliciae, delicatus. It is true that an intrusive vowel in such cases as the foregoing is commonly (though not universally) short, but the long e in these words may have arisen from their being erroneously regarded as compounds with the preposition de.

POOH !

The attitude of dislike and rejection is typified by signs of spitting out an unsavoury morsel, as clearly as the feelings of admiration and pleasure by signs of the relishing of food. Thus Gawaine Douglas expresses his disgust at the way in which the harmonious lines of Virgil were mangled by incompetent translators.

His ornate goldin verses mair than gilt, I spitte for dispite to see thame spylte By sic ane wicht.—5. 44.

' Would to God therefore that we were come to such a detestation and loathing of lying that we would even spattle at it, and cry fy upon it and all that use it.'—Dent's Pathway in Halliwell. The Swedish spott signifies spittle, and also derision, contempt, insult. The traveller Leichardt met with the same mode of expression among the savages of Australia; 'The men commenced talking to them, but occasionally interrupted their speeches by spitting and uttering a noise like pooh ! pooh! apparently expressive of their disgust.'—p. 189. It is probable that this

Australian interjection was, in fact, identical with our own pooh! and like it, intended to represent the sound of spitting, for which purpose Burton in his African travels uses the native tooh! 'To-o-h! Tuh! exclaims the Muzunga, spitting with disgust upon the ground.'—Lake Regions of Africa, 2. 346. The sound of spitting is represented indifferently with an initial p, as in Maori puhwa, to spit out; Lat. spuere, to spit; respuere (to spit back), to reject with disdain; despuere, to express disgust or disdain; or with an initial t, as in Sanscr. t'hût'hû, the sound of spitting; Pers. thu kerdan, Chinook mamook tooh, Chilian tuvcûtun (to make thu, tooh, tuv), to spit; Arabic tufl, spittle; Galla twu! representing the sound of spitting; tufa, to spit; tufada, to spit, to despise, scorn, disdain; with which may be joined English tuff, to spit like a cat. In Greek πτύω the imitation is rendered more vivid by the union of both the initial sounds.

BLURT! PET! TROTZ! The feelings of one dwelling on his own merits and angry at the short-comings of another are marked by a frowning brow, a set jaw, and inflated cheeks, while the breath is drawn in deep inspirations and sent out in puffs through the nostril and passive lips. Hence the expressions of breathing vengeance, fuming with anger, swelling with pride.

Sharp breaths of anger puffed Her fairy nostrils out.—Tennyson. The sound of hard breathing or blowing is represented by the syllables puff, huff, whiff, whence a huff is a fit of ill-temper; to huff, to swell with indignation or pride, to bluster, to storm.—Johnson. The It. buffa is explained in Thomas' Italian Dictionary 'the despising blast of the mouth which we call shirping.' Brescian lofà, to breathe hard, to puff, especially with anger.—Melchiori. Then, as ill-will vents itself in derision, buffa, beffa, a jest, a trick; beffare, to trick or cheat; beffarsi, to laugh at; buffone, a jester, a buffoon.

When the puff of anger or disdain is uttered with exaggerated feeling it produces an explosive sound with the lips, represented by the syllable blurt, which was formerly used as an interjection of defiance. 'Blurt! master constable,' a fig for the constable. Florio speaks of 'a blurt with one's mouth in scorn or derision.' To blurt a thing out is to bring it out with a sudden explosion as if spitting something out of the mouth. A blirt of greeting in Scotch is a burst of crying.

A contemptuous whiff or blurt is otherwise represented by the sounds ft, pt, prt, tt, trt. Thus W. wfft! is explained by Davis, vox abhorrentis et exprobrantis. Wfft, a scorn or slight, a fie; wfftio, to cry shame or fie, to push away with disapprobation.—Lewis. Sanscr. phut, phût, imitative sound of blowing; expression of disregard, indignation, anger.—Benfey. The It. petto, a blurt, petteggiare, pettacchiare, to blurt with the mouth or lips (Fl.), Fr. pétarade, a noise made with the mouth in contempt (Sadler), explain the interjections on. putt! Da. pytt! Sw. pyt! pshaw! tut! nonsense! Norman pet! pour imposer un silence absolu.—Decorde.

From the latter form of the interjection we have E. pet, a fit of ill-humour or of anger; to take pet, to take huff, to take offence; pettish, passionate, ill-humoured. To pet a child is to indulge it in ill-humour, and thence a pet, a darling, an indulged child or animal. Then as a child gives vent to his ill-humour by thrusting out his lips and making a snout, or making a lip, as it is called in nursery language, a hanging lip is called a pet lip in the N. of England. To pout, in Devonshire to poutch or poutle, Illyrian puéti se, Magyar pittyesztni (pitty, a blurt with the mouth), Genevese faire la potte, signify to show ill-will by thrusting out the lips. Hence Genevese pottu, pouting, sulky; Magy. pittyasz, having projecting lips; Genevese pottes, Prov. potz, lips; Languedoc pot, pout, a lip; poutet, a kiss; poutouno, a darling. Again, as in the case of It. huffa, heffa, above-mentioned, we pass from the expression of ill-will to the notion of a disagreeable turn in Da. puds, Sw. puts (to be compared with Devon. poutch), g. posse, a trick.

The E. tut! (an exclamation used for checking or rebuking—Webster) seems to represent an explosion from the tongue instead of the lips, and gives rise to the provincial tutty, ill-tempered, sullen (Hal.), and probably tut-mouthed, having a projecting underjaw; ON. tota, snout; Sw. tut, Da. tud, a spout, compared to the projecting lips of a sulky child.

A more forcible representation of the explosive sound is given by the introduction of an r, as in ON. prutta á hesta, to sound with the lips to a horse in order to make him go on; Sw. prusta, to snort, to sneeze; Magy. prüssz, ptrüssz, as well as tüssz, trüssz, sneeze. The resemblance of a sneeze to a blurt of contempt is witnessed by the expression of a thing not to be sneezed at, not to be scorned. Thus the Magy. forms afford a good illustration of the OE. interjections of scorn. Prut! Ptrot! Tprot! E. Tut! Fr. Trut! and G. Trotz!

The Manuel des Pecchés, treating of the sin of Pride, takes as first example the man— —that is unbuxome all Ayens his fader spirital, And seyth Prut! for thy cursyng, prest.—I. 3016.

Hence are formed the OE. prute, prout, now written proud, and the Northern E. prutten, to hold up the head with pride and disdain (Halliwell), which in the West of E. (with inversion of the liquid and vowel) takes the form of purt, to pout, to be sulky or sullen, G. protzen, Du. pratten, to sulk; protzig, prat, surly, proud, arrogant. Then, as before, passing from the figure of a contemptuous gesture to a piece of contemptuous treatment we have ON. pretta, to play a trick; prettr, a trick. And as from the form pet! putt! was derived Swiss Romance potte, a lip, so from prut! may be explained OHG. prort, a lip, and figuratively a margin or border.

The imitation of the explosive sound with an initial tr, as in Magy. trüsszen-ni, to sneeze, gives It. truscare, to blurt or pop with one's lip or mouth (Fl.); truscio di labbra, Fr. truc, a blurting or popping with the lips or tongue to encourage a horse; ON. trutta, to make a noise of such a description in driving animals: vox est instigantis vel agentis equos aut armenta.—Gudmund. Hence Fr. trut! (an interj. importing indignation), tush, tut, fy man (Cot.); from which we pass to Sw. dialect truta, to pout with the lips, make a snout; trutas, to be out of temper; trut, a snout, muzzle, spout. From the same source is the G. trutz, trotz, tratz, expressing ill-will, scorn, defiance. Trutz nit! do not sulk.—Kladderadatsch. Trotz bieten, to bid defiance; trotzen, to defy, to be forward or obstinate, to pout or sulk, to be proud of; trotzig, haughty, insolent, perverse, peevish, sulky.—Griebe. Du. trotsen, torten, to irritate, insult; Valencian trotar, to deride, to make a jest of. Sc. dort, pet, sullen humour; to take the dorts, to be in a pet; dorty, pettish, saucy, dainty.

A special application of the exclamation of impatience and displeasure is to send an inferior packing from one's presence. Thus from truc, representing a blurt with the mouth, is to be explained It. truccare, to send, to trudge or pack away nimbly (Fl.); trucca via! be off with you. Venetian troxare, to send away. The exclamation in Gaelic takes the form of truis! be off, said to a dog, or a person in contempt (Macalpine). In OE. truss! was used in the same way.

Lyere—was nowher welcome, for his manye tales Over al yhonted, and yhote, trusse.—Piers Pl. Vis. v. 1316.

To hete truss is an exact equivalent of G. trotz bieten. In Modern E. the expression survives in the shape of trudge.

This tale once told none other speech prevailed, But pack and trudge! all leysure was to long.—Gascoigne.

There is a strong analogy between the senses of taste and smell, as between sight and hearing. When we are sensible of an odour which pleases us we snuff up the air through the nostrils, as we eagerly swallow food that is agreeable to the palate; and as we spit out a disagreeable morsel, so we reject an offensive odour by stopping the nose and driving out the infected air through the protruded lips, with a noise of which various representations are exhibited in the interjections of disgust. 'Piff! Phew! Phit!' exclaims a popular writer,—'they have all the significance of those exclamatory whiffs which we propel from our lips when we are compelled to hold our noses.'—Punch, Sept. 2, 1863.

The sound of blowing is imitated all over the world by syllables like whew, fu, pu. The interj. whew! represents a forcible expiration through the protruded lips, ' a sound like that of a half-formed whistle, expressing astonishment, scorn, or dislike' (Webster). Sc. quhew, NE. whew, expresses the sound made by a body passing rapidly through the air. To whew, Maori whio, to whistle; whiu, a stroke with a whip; kowhiuwhiu, to blow, to winnow.

The derivatives from the form pu or fu are extremely numerous. ON. pua, G. pusen, pfausen, pusten, Gr. φυσάω, Lith. pūsu, puttu, pūsti, Gael. puth (pronounced puh), Illyr. puhati, Fin. puhhata, puhkia, Hawaii puhi, Maori pūhipūhi, pupūhi,

Quichua puhuni (Tylor), Zulu pupuza, Malay puput, to puff or blow. The Sanscrit pût, phût, imitative sound of blowing (Benfey), with puphusa, the lungs, may be compared with Maori pûka, to pant, and pûka-pûka, the lungs. Again, we have Magy. funi,* fuvni, Galla bufa, afufa, Quiché puba (Tylor), Sc. fuff, It. buffare, E. puff, to blow.

From forms like the foregoing we pass to the interjections expressing disgust at a bad smell. Sanders in his excellent G. dictionary explains pu! as an interj. representing the sound made by blowing through the barely opened lips, and thence expressing the rejection of anything nasty. ‘ Ha puh! wie stank der alte mist.’ The sense of disgust at a bad smell is expressed in like manner by Lat. phui! phu! fu! fi! (Forcell.), Venetian puh! fi! (Patriarchi), Fr. pouah! fi! Bret. foei! fec’h! E. faugh! foh! phew! Russ. fu! tfu!

It is obvious that the utterance of these interjections of disgust has the effect of announcing, in the most direct manner, the presence of a bad smell, and if the utterance is accompanied by gestures pointing out a particular object it will be equivalent to an assertion that the thing stinks or is rotten. It will then be necessary only to clothe the significant syllable in grammatical forms in order to get verbs or nouns expressing ideas connected with the notion of offensive smell. Accordingly we have Sanscr. pû, pûtika, stinking; pûti, putrid, stinking matter, civet; pûty, to stink, to putrefy; Gr. πύθω, to rot; Lat. puteo, putor, putidus, puter, putresco, pus; Fr. puer, to stink; OFr. pulant, stinking. The Zulu says that the ‘meat says pu,’ meaning that it stinks. Timorese poöp, putrid; Quiché pohir, to rot; puz, rottenness; Tupi puxi, nasty (Tylor). At the same time from a form corresponding to Bret. foei! and E. faugh! the Lat. fœteo and fœtidus, fetid, alongside of puteo and putidus. From the form fû! are Old Norse fûinn, rotten; fûki, stench or anything stinking; fûll, stinking, rotten; fýla, stench. In the Gothic Testament the disciple speaking of the body of Lazarus says Jah fuls ist: by this time he stinketh. Modern Norse fúl, disgusting, of bad taste or smell, troublesome, vexatious, angry, bitter. Han va fúl aat os, he was enraged with us. The E. equivalent is foul, properly ill smelling, then anything opposed to our taste or requirements, loathsome, ugly in look, dirty, turbid (of water), rainy and stormy (of the weather), unfair, underhand in the transactions of life. ON. Fûlyrdi, foul words; fûlmenni, a scoundrel. From the adjective again are derived the verb to file or defile, to make foul; and filth, that which makes foul.

The disagreeable impressions of smell produce a much more vivid repugnance than those of taste, and being besides sensible to all around, they afford the most convenient type of moral reprobation and displeasure. And probably the earliest expression of these feelings would occur in teaching cleanliness to the infant.

• This representation of the sound of blowing or breathing may not improbably be the origin of the root fu, Sanscrit bhu, of the verb to be. The negro who is without the verb to be in his own language supplies its place by live. He says, Your hat no lib that place you put him in.—Farrar, Chap. Lang. p. 54. Orig. Lang. p. 105. A child of my acquaintance would say, Where it live? where is it? Now the breath is universally taken as the type of life.

The interjection fy! expresses in the first instance the speaker's sense of a bad smell, but it is used to the child in such a manner as to signify, That is dirty; do not touch that; do not do that; and then generally, You have done something displeasing to me, something of which you ought to be ashamed. Laura Bridgeman, who was born deaf and blind, used to utter the sound ff or fi when displeased at being touched by strangers.

When used in a figurative sense to express moral reprobation the interj. often assumes a slightly different form from that which expresses disgust at a bad smell. Thus in E. faugh! or foh! express disgust, fie! reprobation. In G. perhaps pfu! or pfui! are chiefly employed in a moral sense; fui! or fi! with respect to smell. Pfui dich an! pfu die Menschen an! shame on them. But the line cannot be very distinctly drawn, and in Platt Deutsch the expression is fu dik an! as in Grisons fudi! shame on you. Fr. fi! commonly expresses reprobation, but it is also used with respect to smell. Fi! qu'il sent mauvais. Faire fi, d'une chose, to turn up one's nose at it, to despise it.

When we consider that shame is the pain felt at the reprobation of those to whom we look with reverence, including our own conscience, and when we observe the equivalence of expressions like pfu dich! fie on you, and shame on you, we shall easily believe that pu! as an expression of reprehension, is the source of Lat. pudet, it shames me, it cries pu! on me; pudeo, I lie under pu! I am ashamed. In like manner repudio is to be explained as I pooh back, I throw back with disdain; and probably refuto, to reject, disdain, disapprove, is derived in the same way from the other form of the interj. fu! being thus analogous to G. pfuien, anpfuien, N. fyne, to cry fie! on, to express displeasure: ein fynte Hund, a scolded dog. The expression then passes on to signify the feelings which prompt the utterance of the interj.; disgust, abhorrence, hate. Thus from Russ. fu! is formed fukat (properly to cry fu!), to abhor, to loathe; from W. ffi! fie! ffiaidd, loathsome; ffieiddio, to loathe, to detest; and so doubtless from the same form of the interj. is to be explained the Goth. fijan, OS. fja, AS. fian, to hate, and thence Goth. fijands, G. feind, an enemy, and ON. fjandi, properly an enemy, then, as E. fiend, the great enemy of the human race. From the same source are E. foe (ON. fidi?) and feud, enmity or deadly quarrel.

The aptness of the figure by which the natural disgust at stench is made the type of the feelings of hatred, is witnessed by the expression of ' stinking in the nostrils ' said of anything that is peculiarly hateful to us.

Professor Müller objects to the foregoing derivations that they confound together the Sanscrit roots pûy, to decay, the source of puteo, and E. foul, and pîy, to hate, corresponding to fijan and fiend (II. 93). But he does not explain where he supposes the confusion to take place, and there is in truth no inconsistency between the doctrine in the text and the distinct recognition of the roots in question. We are familiar in actual speech with two forms of the interjection of disgust; the one comprising G. puh! Fr. pouah! E. faugh! foh! addressed especially to smells; the other answering to G. pfui! Fr. fi! E. fie! and expressing aversion in a more general way. From the first of these we derive puteo and foul; from the second, fijan and fiend. If we suppose the analogous forms pu! and pi! to have been used in a similar way by the Sanscrit-speaking people, it would give a rational account of the roots pûy and pîy, which Müller is content to leave untouched as ultimate elements, but we ought not to be charged with confounding them together because we trace them both to a common principle.

A small class of words is found in all languages analogous to, and many of them identical with, the E. forms, mamma, papa, mammy, daddy, baby, babe, pap (in the sense of breast, as well as of soft food for children), expressing ideas most needed for communication with children at the earliest period of their life. A long list of the names of father and mother was published by Prof. I. C. E. Buschman in the Trans. of the Berlin Acad. der Wiss. for 1852, a translation of which is given in the Proceedings of the Philolog. Soc. vol. vi. It appears that words of the foregoing class are universally formed from the easiest articulations, ba, pa, ma, da, ta, na, or ab, ap, am, at, an. We find ma, me, mi, mu, mam, mama, meme, moma, mother, and less frequently nearly all the same forms in the sense of father; pa, ba, pap, bap, bab, papa, baba, paba, fafe, fabe, father; ba, baba, bama, fa, fafa, fawa, be, bi, bo, bibi, mother; ta, da, tat, tata, tad, dad, dada, dade, tati, titi, father; de, tai, dai, deda, tite, mother; nna, nan, nanna, ninna, nang, nape, father; na, mna, nan, nana, nene, neni, nine, nama, mother. In the same way the changes are rung on ab, aba, abba, avva, appa, epe, ipa, obo, abob, ubaba, abban, father; amba, abai, aapa, ibu, ewa, mother; at, aat, ata, atta, otta, aita, atya, father; hoda, etta, ate, mother; anneh, ina, una, father; ana, anna, enna, eenah, ina, onny, inan, unina, ananak, mother. La Condamine mentions abba or baba, or papa and mama, as common to a great number of American languages differing widely from each other, and he adverts to a rational explanation of the origin of these designations. 'If we regard these words as the first that children can articulate, and consequently those which must in every country have been adopted by the parents who heard them spoken, in order to make them serve as signs for the ideas of father and mother.'—De Brosses, i. 215.

The speech of the mother may perhaps unconsciously give something of an articulate form to the meaningless cooings and mutterings of the infant, as the song of the mother-bird influences that of her young. At any rate these infantile utterances are represented in speech by the syllables ba, fa, ma, ta, giving rise to forms like E. babble, maffle, faffle, famble, tattle, to speak imperfectly like a child, to talk unmeaningly; OE. mamelen, babelen, to babble, mutter; mammer, to mutter; Gr. βαβάζω, to say ba, ba, to speak inarticulately (whence βάζω, to speak); Mod.Gr. μαμουλίζω, to mumble, mutter, &c. Accordingly the joyful or eager utterances of the child when taken up by the mother, or when offered the breast, would sound to her as if the infant greeted her by the name of mama, &c., or as if it called for the breast by that name, and she would adopt these names herself and teach her child the intelligent use of them. Thus Lat. mamma, the infantile term for mother, has remained, with the dim. mamilla, as the name of the breast, and the same is the case with Fin. mamma, Du. mamme, mother, nurse, breast; mammen, to give suck. When one of the imitative syllables as ma had thus been taken up to designate the mother, a different one, as ba, pa, or ta, would be appropriated by analogy as the designation of the father.

Besides the forms corresponding to Lat. mamma, mamilla, papilla, e. pap, for the breast, a class of names strongly resembling each other are found all over the world, which seem to be taken from a direct imitation of the sound of sucking. Thus we have Sanscr. chush, to suck; chuchi, the breast; chuchuka, the nipple; Tarahumara (Am.) tschitschi, to suck; Japan. tschitschi, tsitsi, the breast, milk; Manchu tchetchen, Magy. tsets, Tung. tycen, tygen (Castren), Samoiede ssuso (to be compared with Fr. sucer, to suck), ssudo, Kowrarega susu, Malay soosoo, Gudang tyutyu, Chippeway totosh, Mandingo siso, Bambarra sing, Kurdish ciciek. It. (in nursery language) cioccia, Albanian sissa, G. zitze, E. (nursery) diddy, titty, teat, Malay dada, Hebrew dad, G. dialects didi, titti, the breast or nipple; Goth. dadd-jan, to suck (Pott. Dopp. 33).

The name of the baby himself also is formed on the same imitative principle which gives their designation to so many animals, viz. from the syllables ba, ba, representing the utterance of the infant. The same principle applies to others of these infantile words. The nurse imitates the wrangling or drowsy tones of the infant, as she jogs it to sleep upon her knee, by the syllables na, na, la, la. To the first of these forms belongs the Italian lullaby, ninna nanna; far la ninna nanna, to lull a child; ninnare, ninnellare, to rock, and in children's language nanna, bed, sleep. Far la nanna, andare a nanna, to sleep, to go to bed, go to sleep. In the Mpongwe of W. Africa nana, and in the Swahili of the Eastern coast lala, has the sense of sleep. In Malabar, nin, sleep (Pott). The imitation gives a designation to the infant himself in It. ninna, a little girl; Milanese nan, nanin, a caressing term for an infant. Caro el mi nan, my darling baby. Sp. niño, a child. In Lat. nanus, a dwarf, the designation is transferred to a person of childish stature, as in Mod.Gr. νιβλος, a young child, a simpleton, and in E. ninny it is transferred to a person of childish understanding. From the imitative la, la, are G. lallen, to speak imperfectly like a child, from whence, as in other cases, the sense is extended to speaking in general in Gr. λαλέω, to chatter, babble, talk. From the same source are Lat. lallo, and E. lull, primarily to sing a child to sleep, then to calm, to soothe. In Servian the nurses' song sounds lyu, lyu, whence lyulyuti, to rock; lyulyashka, a cradle.

Another important element of speech, of which a rational explanation may perhaps be found in infantile life, is the demonstrative particle ta or da, the very name of which shows that it corresponds to the act of pointing out the object to which we wish to direct attention. In the language of the deaf-and-dumb, pointing to an object signifies that, and serves the purpose of verbal mention, as is seen at every turn in an account of the making of the will of a dumb man quoted by Tylor. The testator points to himself, then to the will, then touches his trousers' pocket, ' the usual sign by which he referred to his money,' then points to his wife, and so on. But, indeed, we do not need the experience of the deaf-and-dumb to show that pointing to an object is the natural way of calling attention to it. Now in our nurseries the child uses the syllable ta for various purposes, as to express, Please, Thank you, Good-bye; mostly supplementing the utterance by pointing or stretching out the hand towards the object to which it has reference. A child of my acquaintance would ask in this way for what it desired. 'Ta! cheese' (pointing towards it), give me that cheese. Ta! in a different tone returns thanks for something the child has accepted, and may be rendered, that is it, that gratifies me. When it says ta-ta! on being carried out of the room it accompanies the farewell by waving the hand towards those whom it is quitting, implying the direction of its good will towards them, as it might by blowing a kiss to them. Sanders (Germ. Dict.) describes dada as a word of many applications in g. nurseries, as, for instance, with reference to something pretty which the child desires to have. The Fr. child, according to Ménage, says da-da-da, when he wants something, or wants to name something.

'The child,' says Lottner in the paper on the personal pronouns above quoted, ' sees an object, and says ta!' (and at the same time points to it with his finger, I add) ; ' we may translate this by there (it is), or that it is, or carry me thither, or give me it, and by a variety of expressions besides, but the truth is, that every one of these interpretations is wrong, because it replaces the teeming fulness of the infantile word by a clearer but less rich expression of our more abstract language. Yet if a choice between the different translations must be made, I trust that few of my readers will refuse me their consent, when saying: 'there the adverb is by far the most adequate.'—Phil. Trans. 1859. We may carry the matter further and say that the infantile ta or da simply represents the act of pointing, all the incidental meanings being supplied by the circumstances of the case. It is preserved in mature language in G. da, the fundamental signification of which is to signify the presence of an object. 'Dá! nehmen Sie!' 'Dá! Ihr präsent.' Dieser da (as Lat. is-te), this here. Bav. der da-ige, a specified person, as it were by pointing him out. A doubling of the utterance gives Gr. τόδε (or in Attic more emphatically τοδΐ), this here; as well as Goth. thata (ta-ta), E. that. The primitive import of the utterance is completely lost sight of in Lat. da, give; properly (give) that, to be compared with the nursery da-da, by which a G. child indicates or asks for an object of desire. In the expression Da, nehmen Sie, with which something is handed over to another, the word da represents the holding out the object or the act of giving. In the language of Tonga, as Dr Lottner observes, the verb to give is almost invariably replaced by the adverbs signifying hither or thither, 'nay, seems to have been lost altogether.' Mei ia giate au = hither this to me = give me this. Shall I thither this to thee = shall I give you this.

When we seek for a natural connection of the utterance ta! with the act of pointing,* we shall find it, I believe, in the inarticulate stammerings of the infant

* Lottner's explanation is not satisfactory. He adopts in the main the view of Schwartze, when he sprawls with arms and legs in the mere enjoyment of life. The utterance so associated with the muscular action of the child sounds in the ear of the parent like the syllables da-da-da, which thus become symbolical of muscular exertion, whether in the more energetic form of beating, or of simply stretching out the hand, as in giving or pointing.
The syllable da is used to represent inarticulate utterance in Swiss dadern, dodem, to chatter, stutter, tattle, and this also seems the primitive sense of Fr. dadée, childish toying, speech, or dalliance.—Cot. Dada in German nurseries has the sense of smacks or blows. Das kind hat dada bekommen. The same sense is seen in Galla dadada-goda (to make dadada), to beat, to knock, and in Yoruba da, strike, beat, pay.

The greater part of our thoughts seem at the first glance so void of any reference to sound as to throw great difficulty in the way of a practical belief in the imitative origin of language. ' That sounds can be rendered in language by sounds,' says Müller, ' and that each language possesses a large stock of words imitating the sounds given out by certain things, who would deny ? And who would deny that some words originally expressive of sound only might be transferred to other things which have some analogy with sound ? But how are things which do not appeal to the sense of hearing—how are the ideas of going, moving, standing, sinking, tasting, thinking, to be expressed ?'—2nd Series, p. 89. The answer to the query is already given in the former part of the passage : by analogy, or metaphor, which is the transference of a word from one signification to another; the conveyance of a meaning by mention of something which serves to put us in mind of the thing to be signified. But in several of the instances specified by Müller it is not difficult to show a direct connection with sound. Thus we have seen that the conceptions of taste are expressed by reference to the smacking of the lips and tongue in the enjoyment of food. The idea of going is common to a hundred modes of progression that occur in actual existence, of which any one may, and one in particular must, in every mode of expressing the idea, have been the type from which the name was originally taken. In the case of the word go itself, for which Johnson gives seventy meanings, the original is that which he places first, to walk, to move step by step, a sense which lends itself in the most obvious manner to imitative expression, by a representation of the sound of the footfall. The connection between thought and speech is so obvious that we need be at no loss for the means of expressing the idea of thinking. Thus Gr. φράζω is to say; φράζομαι, to say to oneself, to

speaking of the demonstrative in his Coptic Grammar:—'Every object is to the child a living palpable thing. When it cannot reach anywhere with its hand, then instinctively it utters a cry, in order to cause to approach that which has awakened its interest.' ' I add,' says Lottner:—' When the soul, becoming aware of the cry issuing forth from its own interior, takes it up as a sign for the indefinite outward reality, which is the object of its desire, and shapes it into an articulate sound, then we have a pronoun demonstrative.' think, while λόγος signifies both speech and thought. In some of the languages of the Pacific thinking is said to be called speaking in the belly. Maori mea and ki both signify to speak as well as to think.
The connection between the senses of taste and smell is so close that expressions originally taken from the exercise of the one faculty are constantly transferred to the other. The G. schmecken, to smack or taste, is used in Bavaria in the sense of smell, and schmecker, in popular language, signifies the nose. So from Lat. sapere (which may probably spring from another representation of the sound of smacking) comes sapor, taste, and thence E. savour, which is applied to impressions of smell as well as to those of the palate, while sapere itself, properly to distinguish by taste, is extended to the exercise of the understanding, to have discernment, to be wise. Sapiens, a man of nice taste, also wise, discreet, judicious. In the same way the Goth. snutrs, AS. snotor, wise, prudent, may be explained from the Gael. snot, to sniff, snuff the air, smell, and figuratively, suspect; Bav. snütten, to sniff, smell, search; ON. snudra, to sniff out. Here it will be seen the expression of the idea of wisdom is traced by no distant course to an undoubted onomatopœia.
The same sort of analogy as that which is felt between the senses of smell and taste, unites in like manner the senses of sight and hearing, and thus terms expressing conceptions belonging to the sense of hearing are figuratively applied to analogous phenomena of the visible world. In the case of sparkle, for example, which is a modification of the same imitative root with Sw. spraka, Lith. sprageti, to crackle, rattle, the rapid flashing of a small bright light upon the eye is signified by the figure of a similar repetition of short sharp impressions on the ear. Fr. pétiller is an imitative form signifying in the first place to crackle, then to sparkle, and, in the domain of movement, to quiver. Du. tintelen, to tinkle, then to twinkle, to glitter.
Again, éclat (in Old Fr. esclat), properly a clap or explosion, is used in the sense of brightness, splendour, brilliancy. The word bright had a similar origin. It is the equivalent of G. pracht, splendour, magnificence, which in OHG. signified a clear sound, outcry, tumult. Bavarian bracht, clang, noise. In AS. we have beorhtian, to resound, and beorht, bright. In the old poem of the Owl and the Nightingale bright is applied to the clear notes of a bird.
Heo—song so schille and so brihte That far and ner me hit iherde.—l. 1654.
Du. schateren, scheteren, to make a loud noise, to shriek with laughter; schiteren, to shine, to glisten; Dan. knistre, knittre, gnittre, to crackle; gnistre, to sparkle. Many striking examples of the same transference of signification may be quoted from the Finnish, as kilinä, a ringing sound, a brilliant light; kilid, tinkling, glittering; wilistä, to ring as a glass; willata, wilellä, wilahtaa, to flash, to glitter; kimistä, to sound clear (parallel with E. chime), kimmalltaa, kiimottaa, to shine, to glitter, &c. In Galla, bilbila, a ringing noise as of a bell; bilbilgoda (to make bilbil), to ring, to glitter, beam, glisten. Sanscr. marmara, a rustling sound; Gr. μαρμαίρω, to glitter.

The language of painters is full of musical metaphor. It speaks of harmonious or discordant colouring, discusses the tone of a picture. So in modern slang, which mainly consists in the use of new and violent metaphors (though perhaps, in truth, not more violent than those in which the terms of ordinary language had their origin), we hear of screaming colours, of dressing loud. The speculations of the Ancients respecting the analogies of sound and signification were extremely loose, as may be seen in the Cratylus, where Socrates is made to explain the expressive power of the letter-sounds. The letter r, he says, from the mobility of the tongue in pronouncing it, seemed to him who settled names an appropriate instrument for the imitation of movement. He accordingly used it for that purpose in ῥεῖν and ῥοή, flow and flux, then in τρόμος, τραχύς, κρούειν, θραύειν, ἐρείκειν, κερματίζειν, ῥυμβεῖν, tremour, rough, strike, break, rend, shatter, whirl. Observing that the tongue chiefly slides in pronouncing l, he used it in forming the imitative words λεῖος, smooth, λιπαρός, oily, κολλώδης, gluey, ὀλισθάνειν, to slide. And observing that n kept the voice within, he framed the words ἔνδον, ἐντός, within, inside, fitting the letters to the sense.

Much of the same kind is found in an interesting passage of Augustine, which has been often quoted.

'The Stoics,' he says, 'hold that there is no word of which a clear account cannot be given. *And because in this way you might say that it would be an infinite task if you had always to seek for the origin of the words in which you explained the origin of the former one, it was easy to suggest the limitation: Until you come to the point where there is direct resemblance between the sound of the word and the thing signified, as when we speak of the tinkling (tinnitum) of brass, the neighing of horses, the bleating of sheep, the clang (clangorem) of trumpets, the clank (stridorem) of chains, for you perceive that these words sound like the things which are signified by them. But because there are things which do not sound, with these the similitude of touch comes into play, so that if the things are soft or rough to the touch, they are fitted with names that by the nature of the letters are felt as soft or rough to the ear. Thus the word lene, soft, itself sounds soft to the ear; and who does not feel also that the word asperitas, roughness, is rough like the thing which it signifies? Voluptas, pleasure, is soft to the ear; crux, the cross, rough. The things themselves affect our feelings in accordance with the sound of the words. As honey is sweet to the taste, so the name, mel, is felt as soft by the ear. Acre, sharp, is rough in both ways. Lana, wool, and vepres, briars, affect the ear in accordance with the way in which the things signified are felt by touch.

It was believed that the first germs of language were to be found in the words where there was actual resemblance between the sound of the word and

* Et quia hoc modo suggerere facile fuit, si diceres hoc infinitum esse quibus verbis alterius verbi originem interpretaris, eorum rursus a te originem quaerendam esse, donec perveniatur eo ut res cum sono verbi aliqua similitudine concinnat, &c.—Principia Dialecticæ, c. v. in vol. i. of his works.

the thing which it signified: that from thence the invention of names proceeded to take hold of the resemblance of things between themselves; as when, for example, the cross is called crux because the rough sound of the word agrees with the roughness of the pain which is suffered on the cross; while the legs are called crura, not on account of the roughness of pain, but because in length and hardness they are like wood in comparison with the other members of the body.

It is obvious that analogies like the foregoing are far too general to afford any satisfactory explanation of the words for which they are supposed to account. If any word that sounded rough might signify anything that was either rough or rigid or painful it would apply to such an infinite variety of objects, and the limits of the signification would be so vague, that the utterance would not afford the smallest guidance towards the meaning of the speaker. Still it is plain that there must be some analogy between sound and movement, and consequently form, in virtue of which we apply the terms rough and smooth to the three conceptions. The connection seems to lie in the degree of effort or resistance of which we are conscious in the utterance of a rough sound, or in the apprehension of a rough surface. We regard the sound of r as rough compared with that of l, because the tongue is driven into vibration in the utterance of r, making us sensible of an effort which answers to the resistance felt in the apprehension of a rough surface, while in l the sound issues without reaction on the vocal organs, like the hand passing over a smooth surface. A greater degree of roughness is when the inequalities of the surface are separately felt, or in sound, when the vibratory whir passes into a rattle. In a still higher degree of roughness the movement becomes a succession of jogs, corresponding to the inequalities of a rugged surface or a jagged outline, or, in the case of the voice, to the abrupt impulses of a harshly broken utterance. Again, we are conscious of muscular effort when we raise the tone of the voice by an actual rise of the vocal apparatus in the throat, and it is precisely this rise and fall of the bodily apparatus in the utterance of a high or low note, that makes us consider the notes as high or low. There are thus analogies between sound and bodily movement which enable us, by utterances of the voice without direct imitation of sound, to signify varieties of movement, together with corresponding modifications of figured surface and outline. The word twitter represents in the first instance a repetition of a short sharp sound, but it is applied by analogy to a vibratory movement that is wholly unaccompanied by sound. The feeling of abruptness in sound is given by a syllable ending with one of the mutes, or checks as they are called by Müller, consisting of the letters b, d, g, p, t, k, the peculiarity of which in pronunciation is that 'for a time they stop the emission of breath altogether' (Lect. ii. p. 138). Hence in pronouncing a syllable ending in a mute or check we are conscious of an abrupt termination of the vocal effort, and we employ a wide range of syllables constructed on that principle to signify a movement abruptly checked, as shag, shog, jag, jog, jig, dag, dig, stag (in stagger, to reel abruptly from side to side), job, jib, stab, rug, tug; Fr. sag-oter, to jog; saccade, a rough and sudden jerk, motion, or check. The syllable suk is used in Bremen to represent a jog in riding or going. 'Dat geit jummer suk! suk! of a rough horse. Ene olde suksuk, an old worthless horse or carriage, a rattletrap. Sukkeln, g. schuckeln, schockeln, to jog. On the same principle we have g. zack, used interjectionally to represent a sharp sudden movement; zacke, a jag or sharp projection; zickzack, e. zigzag, applied to movement by impulses abruptly changing in direction, or the figure traced out by such a movement; the opposition in the direction of successive impulses being marked by the change of vowel from i to a. The production of sound, however, is so frequent a consequence of movement, that we never can be sure, in cases like the foregoing, that the word does not originally spring from direct imitation. Such seems certainly the case with the syllables tick, tack, tock, representing sharp short sounds of different kinds, and analogous movements. Thus we have E. tick-tack for the beat of a clock; Parmesan tic-toc for the beat of the heart or the pulse, or the ticking of a watch; Bolognese tec-tac, a cracker; It. tech-tech, toch-toch, tecche-tocche, for the sound of knocking at a door. Hence tick or tock for any light sharp movement. To tick a thing off, to mark it with a touch of the pen; to take a thing on tick, to have it ticked or marked on the score; to tickle, to incite by light touches. Bolognese tocc, Brescian toch, the blow of the clapper on a bell or knocker on a door, lead to Spanish tocar, to knock, to ring a bell, to beat or play on a musical instrument, and also (with the meaning softened down) to Italian toccare, French toucher, to touch. The Milanese toch, like English tick, is a stroke with a pen or pencil, then, figuratively, a certain space, so much as is traversed at a stroke; on bell tocch di strada, a good piece of road; then, as Italian tocco, a piece or bit of anything.

The same transference of the expression from phenomena of sound to those of bodily substance takes place with the syllables muk, mik, mot, tot, kuk, kik, &c., which were formerly mentioned as being used (generally with a negative) to express the least appreciable sound. The closeness of the connection between such a meaning and the least appreciable movement is witnessed by the use of the same word still to express alike the absence of sound or motion. Accordingly the g. muck, representing in the first instance a sound barely audible, is made to signify a slight movement. Mucken, to mutter, to say a word; also to stir, to make the least movement.

The representative syllable takes the form of mick or kick in the Dutch phrase noch micken noch kicken, not to utter a syllable. Then, passing to the signification of motion, it produces Dutch micken, Illyrian migati, to wink; micati (mitsati), to stir; Lat. micare, to glitter, to move rapidly to and fro. The analogy is then carried a step further, and the sense of a slight movement is made a stepping-stone to the signification of a material atom, a small bodily object. Hence Lat. and It. mica, Spanish miga, Fr. mie, a crumb, a little bit. The train of thought runs through the same course in Dutch kicken, to utter a slight sound; Fr. chicoter, to sprawl like an infant; Welsh cicio, and E. kick, to strike with the foot. Then in the sense of any least portion of bodily substance, It. cica, Fr. chic, chiquet, a little bit; chique, a quid of tobacco, a playing-marble, properly a small lump of clay; Sp. chico, little. In the same way from the representation of a slight sound by the syllable mot, mut, as in E. mutter, or in the Italian phrase non fare ne motto ne lotto, not to utter a syllable, we pass to the Yorkshire phrase, neither moit nor doit, not an atom; E. mote, an atom, and mite, the least visible insect; Du. mot, dust, fragments; It. motta, Fr. motte, a lump of earth.
The use of a syllable like tot to represent a short indistinct sound is shown in the Italian phrase above quoted; in O.N. taut, N. tot, a whisper, murmur, mutter; E. totle, to whisper (Pr. Pm.); titter, to laugh in a subdued manner. The expression passes on to the idea of movement in E. tot, to jot down or note with a slight movement of the pen; totter, tottle, to move slightly to and fro, to toddle like a child; titter, to tremble, to seesaw (Halliwell); Lat. titillo, to tickle (provincially tittle), to excite by slight touches or movements. Then, passing from the sense of a slight movement to that of a small bodily object, we have E. tot, anything small; totty, little (Halliwell); Da. tot. Sc. tait, a bunch or flock of flax, wool, or the like; It. tozzo, a bit, a morsel; E. tit, a bit, a morsel, anything small of its kind, a small horse, a little girl; titty, tiny, small; titlark, a small kind of lark; titmouse (Du. mossche, a sparrow), a small bird; tittle, a jot or little tit. It. citto, zitto, a lad; citta, zitella, a girl.
To jot, to touch, to jog, to note a thing hastily on paper; jot, a small quantity.
The change of the vowel from o or o to i, or the converse, in such expressions as zigzag, ticktack, seesaw, belongs to a principle which is extensively applied in the development of language, when an expression having already been found for a certain conception, it is wished to signify something of the same fundamental kind, but differing in degree or in some subordinate character. This end is commonly attained by a change, often entirely arbitrary, either in the vowel or the initial consonant of the significant syllable. The vowel changes from i to a in tick-tack, for the beating of a clock, not because the pendulum makes a different sound in swinging to the right or to the left, but simply in order to symbolise the change of direction. A similar instance of distinction by arbitrary difference is noticed by Mr Tylor in the language of gesture, where a wise man being symbolised by touching the tip of the nose with the forefinger, the same organ is touched with the little finger to signify a foolish man. In a similar way the relations of place, here, there, and out there, corresponding to the personal pronouns, I, you, and he, are frequently distinguished by what appears to be an arbitrary change of the vowel sound. Pott (Doppelung p. 48) cites from the African Tumale, gni, gno, gnu, for the three personal pronouns, where the vowels follow in regular scale (i, e, a, o, u) according to the proximity of the object indicated. But the same language has re this, ri that, where the order is inverted. The following table is from Tylor (Prim. Cult. i. 199).
Javan. iki, this; ika, that; iku, that, further off; Malagasy io, here (close at hand); eo, there (further off); ao, there (at a short distance).

Japan ko, here ; ka, there.
Canarese ivanu, this ; ivanu, that (intermediate) ; uvanu, that.
Tamul î, this ; â, that.
Dhimas isho, ita, here ; usho, uta, there.
Abchasian abri, this ; ubri, that.
Ossetic am, here ; um, there.
Magyar ez, this ; az, that.
Zulu apa, here ; apo, there ; lesi, this ; leso, that ; lesiya, that in the distance.
Yoruba na, this ; ni, that.
Fernandian olo, this ; ole, that.
Sahaptin (America) kina, here ; kuna, there.
Mutsun ne, here ; nu, there.
Tarahumara ibe, here ; abe, there.
Guarani nde, ne, thou ; ndi, ni, he.
Botocudo ati, I ; oti, thou, you, to.
Carib ne, thou ; ni, he.
Chilian tva, this ; tvey, that.

Here, as Mr Tylor remarks, no constant rule is observed, but sometimes i and sometimes a is used to denote the nearer object.

Of a similar nature is the distinction of sex by a change of vowel, as in Italian o for the male, and a for the female. Fin. ukko, an old man ; akka, an old woman ; Mangu chacha, mas ; cheche, femina ; ama, father ; eme, mother. Carib baba, father ; bibi, mother. Ibu (Afr.) nna, father ; nne, mother. It is probably to a like principle of distinction that the k, κ (π), qu, w, which form the initial element of the interrogative in Sanscr., Gr., Lat., and G. respectively, owe their origin. The interrogative pronouns who ? or what ? are expressed in gesture by looking or pointing about in an inquiring manner, in fact (says Tylor), by a number of unsuccessful attempts to say he, that. Then, as the act of pointing was represented in speech by the particle ta, it seems that the interrogative signification was given by the arbitrary change from ta to ka, from whence may be explained the various initials of the interrogative in the different members of the Indo-Germanic family.

On the other hand, there is often an innate fitness in the change of vowel to the modification of meaning which it is made to denote. The vowels a and o are pronounced with open throat and full sound of the voice, while we compress the voice through a narrower opening and utter a less volume of sound in the pronunciation of i or e. Hence we unconsciously pass to the use of the vowel i in expressing diminution of action or of size. A young relation of mine adopted the use of baby as a diminutival prefix.* Baby-Thomas was his designation for the smaller of two servants of that name. But when he wishes to carry the diminution further, he narrows the sound of the word to bee-bee, and at last it becomes a beebee-beebee thing. In the same way seems to be formed Acra (Afr.) bi, child, young one ; bibio, little, small (Pott. 100). It seems to me probable that • Vei den, child, also little.

In this sense of the thinness of the sound of i or ee is simply embodied in the diminutival wee. 'A little wee face with a little yellow beard.'—Merry Wives. A further development of the significant sound gives the nursery weeny,* surviving in regular speech in G. wenig, little, few; Sc. wean, a child. And perhaps the E. tiny may be attained through the rhyming tiny-winy or teeny-weeny, analogous to winy-piny, fretful, speaking in a pipy tone of voice. It will be observed that we express extreme diminution by dwelling on the narrow vowel: 'a little tee-ny thing,' making the voice as small as possible.

The consciousness of forcing the voice through a narrow opening in the pronunciation of the sound ee leads to the use of syllables like peep, keek, teet, to signify a thing making its way through a narrow opening, just beginning to appear, looking through between obstacles. Da. at pippe frem is to spring forth, to make its way through the bursting envelope, whence Fr. pepin, the pip or pippin, the germ from whence the plant is to spring. The Sw. has tittafrem, to peep through, to begin to appear; titta, to peep, in old E. to teet.

The rois knoppis tetand furth thare hed Gan chyp and kythe thare vernale lippis red.—Douglas Virgil, 401. 8.

The peep of dawn is when the curtain of darkness begins to lift and the first streaks of light to push through the opening.

The sound of the footfall is represented in German by the syllables trapp-trapp-trapp; from whence Du. trap, a step, trappen, to tread, Sw. trappa, stairs. The change to the short compressed i in trip adapts the syllable to signify a light quick step: Du. trippen, trippelen, to leap, to dance (Kil.); Fr. trépigner, to beat the ground with the feet. Clank represents the sound of something large, as chains; clink, or chink, of smaller things, as money. To sup up, is to take up liquids by large spoonfuls; to sip, to sup up by little and little, with lips barely open. Top, nab, knob, signify an extremity of a broad round shape; tip, nib, nipple, a similar object of a smaller size and pointed shape.

Where a sound is kept up by the continued repetition of distinct impulses on the ear, the simplest mode of representing the continued sound is by the repetition of a syllable resembling the elementary impulse, as ding-dong, G. lim-lam, It. din-din, don-don, for the sound of bells; murmur, for a continuance of low and indistinct sounds; pit-a-pat, for a succession of light blows; bow-wow, for the barking of a dog, &c. In barbarous languages the formation of words on this principle is very common, and in the Pacific dialects, for instance, they form a considerable proportion of the vocabulary. From cases like the foregoing, where an imitative syllable is repeated for the purpose of signifying the continued repetition of a certain phenomenon, the principle of reduplication, as it is called, is extended to express simple continuance of action, or even, by a further advance in abstraction, the idea of action in general, while the special nature of the action intended is indicated by the repeated syllable. In some African languages repetition is habitually used to qualify the meaning of the verb. Thus we have Wolof sopa,

* 'A little weeny thing.' I have known Weeny kept as a pet-name by one who had been puny in childhood.

to love, sopasopa, to love constantly; Mpongwe kamba, to speak, kamba-gamba, to talk at random; kenda, to walk, kendagenda, to walk about for amusement. Again, from Maori muka, flax, muka-muka (to use a bunch of flax), to wipe or rub; mawhiti, to skip, mawhitiwhiti, a grasshopper; puka, to pant, puka-puka, the lungs, the agent in panting; Malay ayun, to rock, ayunayunan, a cradle. That the principle is not wholly lifeless in English is witnessed by the verb pooh-pooh, to say pooh! to, to treat with contempt.

It is obvious that the same device which expresses continuance in time may be applied to continuance or extension in space. Thus in the Pacific loa, loloa, signify long; lololoa, very long (Pott. 97). And generally, repetition or continuance of the significant sound expresses excess in degree of the quality signified. Mandingo ding, child; if very young, ding-ding; Susa di, child; didi, little child (p. 99). Madagascar ratsi or ratchi, bad; ratsi-ratsi, or ratchi, very bad. ' In the Gaboon the strength with which such a word as mpolu is uttered, serves to show whether it is great, very great, or very very great, and in this way, as Mr Wilson remarks in his Mpongwe grammar, the comparative degrees of greatness, smallness, hardness, rapidity and strength, &c., may be conveyed with more accuracy than could readily be conceived.'—Tylor, Prim. Cult. i. 196. The same principle of expression is in familiar use with ourselves, although not recognised in written language; as when we speak of an e-nô-rmous appetite, or a little tee-ny thing.

The use of reduplicate forms is condemned by the taste of more cultivated languages, and the sense of continuance is expressed in a more artificial way by the frequentative form of the verb, as it is called, where the effect of repetition is given by the addition of an intrinsically unmeaning element, such as the syllable et, er, or el, acting as a sort of echo to the fundamental syllable of the word. Thus in E. racket, a clattering noise, or in Fr. cliqu-et-is, clash of weapons, the imitative syllables, rack and clique, are echoed by the rudimentary et, instead of being actually repeated, and the words express a continued sound of rack, rack, or click, click.

It is true that such a syllable as et or it could only, properly speaking, be used as an echo to hard sounds, but many devices of expression are extended by analogy far beyond their original aim, and thus et or it are employed in Lat. and Fr. to express repetition or continuance in a general way, without reference to the particular nature of the repeated phenomenon. So from clamo, to call, clamito, to keep calling, to call frequently; from Fr. tache, a spot, tach-et-er, to cover with spots. The elements usually employed in E. for the same purpose are composed of an obscure vowel with the consonants l or r, on which the voice can dwell for a length of time with a more or less sensible vibration, representing the effect on the ear when a confused succession of beats has merged in a continuous murmur. Thus in the pattering of rain or hail, expressing the fall of a rapid succession of drops on a hard surface, the syllable pat imitates the sound of a single drop, while the vibration of the r in the second syllable represents the murmuring sound of the shower when the attention is not directed to the individual taps of which it is composed. In like manner to clatter is to do anything accompanied by a succession of noises that might be represented by the syllable clat; to crackle, to make a succession of cracks; to rattle, dabble, bubble, guggle, to make a succession of noises that might be represented individually by the syllables rat, dab, bub, gug. The contrivance is then extended to signify continued action unconnected with any particular noise, as grapple, to make a succession of grabs; shuffle, to make a succession of shoves; draggle, waggle, joggle, to continue dragging, wagging, jogging. The final el or er is frequently replaced by a simple l, which, as Ihre remarks under gnælla, has something ringing (aliquid tinnuli) in it. Thus to mewl and pule, in Fr. miauler and piauler, are to cry mew and pew; to wail is to cry wae; Piedmontese bau-l-é, or fé bau, to make bau-bau, to bark like a dog.

By a further extension the frequentative element is made to signify the simple employment of an object in a way which has to be understood from the circumstances of the case. Thus to knee-l is to rest on the bent knee; to hand-le, to employ the hand in dealing with an object. In cases like these, where the frequentative element is added to a word already existing in the language, the effect of the addition is simply to give a verbal signification to the compound, an end which might equally be attained by the addition of verbal inflections of person and tense, without the intervention of the frequentative element.

It seems accordingly to be a matter of chance whether the terminal l is added or omitted. The Fr. miauler and bêler correspond to E. mew and baa; the G. knie-en to E. kneel. In E. itself, to hand, in some applications, as to handle, in others, is used for dealing with an object by the hand.

The application of the frequentative el or er to signify the agent or the instrument of action (as in AS. rynel, a runner, or in E. rubber, he who rubs, or what is used in rubbing) is analogous to the attainment of the same end by repetition of the significant syllable, as shown above in the case of Malay ayunayunan, a cradle or rocker from ayun, to rock, or Maori puka-puka, the lungs (the puffers of the body), from puka, to puff.

The same element is found in the construction of adjectives, as in AS. ficol, fickle, to be compared with G. fickfacken, to move to and fro, and in AS. wancol, G. wankel, wavering, by the side of wanken, wankeln, to rock or wag.

When we come to sum up the evidence of the imitative origin of language, we find that words are to be found in every dialect that are used with a conscious intention of directly imitating sound, such as flap, crack, smack, or the interjections ah! ugh! But sometimes the signification is carried on, either by a figurative mode of expression, or by association, to something quite distinct from the sound originally represented, although the connection between the two may be so close as to be rarely absent from the mind in the use of the word. Thus the word flap originally imitates the sound made by the blow of a flat surface, as the wing of a bird or the corner of a sail. It then passes on to signify the movement to and fro of a flat surface, and is thence applied to the moveable leaf of a table, the part that moves on a hinge up and down, where all direct connection with sound is lost. In like manner crack imitates the sound made by a hard body breaking, and is applied in a secondary way to the effects of the breach, to the separation between the broken parts, or to a narrow separation between adjoining edges, such as might have arisen from a breach between them. But when we speak of looking through the crack of a door we have no thought of the sound made by a body breaking, although it is not difficult, on a moment's reflection, to trace the connection between such a sound and the narrow opening which is our real meaning. It is probable that smack is often used in the sense of taste without a thought of the smacking sound of the tongue in the enjoyment of food, which is the origin of the word.

When an imitative word is used in a secondary sense, it is obviously a mere chance how long, or how generally, the connection with the sound it was originally intended to represent, will continue to be felt in daily speech. Sometimes the connecting links are to be found only in a foreign language, or in forms that have become obsolete in our own, when the unlettered man can only regard the word he is using as an arbitrary symbol. A gull or a dupe is a person easily deceived. The words are used in precisely the same sense, but what is the proportion of educated Englishmen who use them with any consciousness of the metaphors which give them their meaning? Most of us probably would be inclined to connect the first of the two with guile, deceit, and comparatively few are aware that it is still provincially used in the sense of an unfledged bird.

When several other instances are pointed out in which a young bird is taken as the type of helpless simplicity, it leaves no doubt that this is the way in which the word gull has acquired its ordinary meaning. Dupe comes to us from the French, in which language it signifies also a hoopoe, a bird with which we have so little acquaintance at the present day, that we are apt at first to regard the double signification as an accidental coincidence. But when we find that the names by which the hoopoe is known in Italian, Polish, Breton, as well as in French (all radically distinct), are also used in the sense of a simpleton or dupe, we are sure that there must be something in the habits of the bird, which, at a time when it was more familiarly known, made it an appropriate type of the character its name in so many instances is used to designate. We should hardly have connected ugly with the interjection ugh! if we had not been aware of the obsolete verb ug, to cry ugh! or feel horror at, and it is only the accidental preservation of occasional passages where the verb is written houge, that gives us the clue by which huge and hug are traced to the same source.

Thus the imitative power of words is gradually obscured by figurative use and the loss of intermediate forms, until all suspicion of the original principle of their signification has faded away in the minds of all but the few who have made the subject their special study. There is, moreover, no sort of difference either in outward appearance, or in mode of use, or in aptness to combine with other elements, between words which we are anyhow able to trace to an imitative source, and others of whose significance the grounds are wholly unknown. It would be impossible for a person who knew nothing of the origin of the words huge and vast, to guess from the nature of the words which of the two was derived from the imitation of sound; and when he was informed that huge had been explained on this principle, it would be difficult to avoid the inference that a similar origin might possibly be found for vast also. Nor can we doubt that a wider acquaintance with the forms through which our language has passed would make manifest the imitative origin of numerous words whose signification now appears to be wholly arbitrary. And why should it be assumed that any words whatever are beyond the reach of such an explanation ?

If onomatopoeia is a vera causa as far as it goes; if it affords an adequate account of the origin of words signifying things not themselves apprehensible by the ear, it behoves the objectors to the theory to explain what are the limits of its reach, to specify the kind of thought for which it is inadequate to find expression, and the grounds of its shortcomings. And as the difficulty certainly does not lie in the capacity of the voice to represent any kind of sound, it can only be found in the limited powers of metaphor, that is, in the capacity of one thing to put us in mind of another. It will be necessary then to show that there are thoughts so essentially differing in kind from any of those that have been shown to be capable of expression on the principle of imitation, as to escape the inference in favour of the general possibility of that mode of expression.

Hitherto, however, no one has ventured to bring the contest to such an issue. The arguments of objectors have been taken almost exclusively from cases where the explanations offered by the supporters of the theory are either ridiculous on the face of them, or are founded in manifest blunder, or are too far-fetched to afford satisfaction; while the positive evidence of the validity of the principle, arising from cases where it is impossible to resist the evidence of an imitative origin, is slurred over, as if the number of such cases was too inconsiderable to merit attention in a comprehensive survey of language.

That the words of imitative origin are neither inconsiderable in number, nor restricted in signification to any limited class of ideas, is sufficiently shown by the examples given in the foregoing pages. We cannot open a dictionary without meeting with them, and in any piece of descriptive writing they are found in abundance.

No doubt the number of words which remain unexplained on this principle would constitute much the larger portion of the dictionary, but this is no more than should be expected by any reasonable believer in the theory. As long as the imitative power of a word is felt in speech it will be kept pretty close to the original form. But when the signification is diverted from the object of imitation, and the word is used in a secondary sense, it immediately becomes liable to corruption from various causes, and the imitative character is rapidly obscured.

The imitative force of the interjections ah! or ach! and ugh! mainly depends upon the aspiration, but when the vocable is no longer used directly to represent the cry of pain or of shuddering, the sound of the aspirate is changed to that of a hard guttural, as in ache (ake) and ugly, and the consciousness of imitation is wholly lost.

In savage life, when the communities are small and ideas few, language is liable to rapid change. To this effect we may cite the testimony of a thoughtful traveller who had unusual opportunities of observation. 'There are certain peculiarities in Indian habits which lead to a quick corruption of language and segregation of dialects. When Indians are conversing among themselves they seem to have pleasure in inventing new modes of pronunciation and in distorting words. It is amusing to notice how the whole party will laugh when the wit of the circle perpetrates a new slang term, and these words are very often retained. I have noticed this during long voyages made with Indian crews. When such alterations occur amongst a family or horde which often live many years without communication with the rest of their tribe, the local corruption of language becomes perpetuated. Single hordes belonging to the same tribe and inhabiting the banks of the same river thus become, in the course of many years' isolation, unintelligible to other hordes, as happens with the Colinas on the Jurua. I think it very probable, therefore, that the disposition to invent new words and new modes of pronunciation, added to the small population and habits of isolation of hordes and tribes, are the causes of the wonderful diversity of languages in South America.'—Bates, Naturalist on the Amazons, i. 330.

But even in civilised life, where the habitual use of writing has so strong a tendency to fix the forms of language, words are continually changing in pronunciation and in application from one generation to another; and in no very long period, compared with the duration of man, the speech of the ancestors becomes unintelligible to their descendants. In such cases it is only the art of writing that preserves the pedigree of the altered forms. If English, French, and Italian were barbarous unwritten languages no one would dream of any relation between bishop, évêque, and vescovo, all immediate descendants of the Latin episcopus. Who, without knowledge of the intermediate diurnus and giorno, would suspect that such a word as jour could be derived from dies ? or without written evidence would have thought of resolving Goodbye into God be with you (God b' w' ye), or topsyturvy into topside the other way (top si' t' o'er way) ? Suppose that in any of these cases the word had been mimetic in its earlier form, how vain it would have been to look for any traces of imitation in the later ! If we allow the influences which have produced such changes as the above to operate through that vast lapse of time required to mould out of a common stock such languages as English, Welsh, and Russian, we shall wonder rather at the large than the small number of cases, in which traces of the original imitation are still to be made out.

The letters of the alphabet have a strong analogy with the case of language. The letters are signs which represent articulate sounds through the sense of sight, as words are signs which represent every subject of thought through the sense of hearing. Now the significance of the names by which the letters are known in Hebrew and Greek affords a strong presumption that they were originally pictorial imitations of material things, and the presumption is converted into moral certainty by the accidental preservation in one or two cases of the original portraiture. The zigzag line which represents the wavy surface of water when used as the symbol of Aquarius among the signs of the zodiac is found in Egyptian hieroglyphics with the force of the letter n.* If we cut the symbol down to the three last strokes of the zigzag we shall have the n of the early Greek inscriptions, which does not materially differ from the capital N of the present day.

But no one from the mere form of the letter could have suspected an intention of representing water. Nor is there one of the letters, the actual form of which would afford us the least assistance in guessing at the object it was meant to represent. Why then should it be made a difficulty in admitting the imitative origin of the oral signs, that the aim at imitation can be detected in only a third or a fifth, or whatever the proportion may be, of the radical elements of our speech? Nevertheless, a low estimate of the number of forms so traceable to an intelligible source often weighs unduly against the acceptance of a rational theory of language.

Mr Tylor fully admits the principle of onomatopoeia, but thinks that the evidence adduced does not justify ' the setting up of what is called the Interjectional and Imitative theory as a complete solution of the problem of original language. Valid as this theory proves itself within limits, it would be incautious to accept a hypothesis which can perhaps account for a twentieth of the crude forms in any language, as a certain and absolute explanation of the nineteen twentieths which remain. A key must unlock more doors than this, to be taken as the master key' (Prim. Cult. i. 208). The objection does not exactly meet the position held by prudent supporters of the theory in question. We do not assert that every device by which language has been modified and enlarged

* The evidence for the derivation of the letter N from the symbol representing water (in Coptic noun) cannot be duly appreciated unless taken in conjunction with the case of the letter M. The combination of the symbols 1 and 2, as shown in the subjoined illustration, occurs very frequently in hieroglyphics with the force of MN. The lower symbol is used for n, and thus in this combination the upper symbol undoubtedly has the force of m, although it is said to be never used independently for that letter.

Now if the two symbols be epitomised by cutting them down to their extremity, as a lion is represented (fig. 13) by his head and fore-legs, it will leave figures 3 and 4, which are identical with the M and N of the early Phoenician and Greek. Figures 5, 6, 7, are forms of Phoenician M from Gesenius; 8, ancient Greek M; 9, Greek N from Gesenius; 10 and 11 from Inscriptions in the British Museum.

as, for instance, the use of a change of vowel in many languages to express comparative nearness or distance of position) has had its origin in imitation of sound.

Our doctrine is not exclusive. If new 'modes of phonetic expression, unknown to us as yet,' should be discovered, we shall be only in the position of the fathers of modern Geology when the prodigious extent of glacial action in former ages began to be discovered, and we shall be the first to recognise the efficiency of the new machinery. Our fundamental tenet is that the same principle which enables Man to make known his wants or to convey intelligence by means of bodily gesture, would prompt him to the use of vocal signs for the same purpose, leading him to utterances, which either by direct resemblance of sound, or by analogies felt in the effort of utterance, might be associated with the notion to be conveyed. The formation of words in this way in all languages has been universally recognised, and it has been established in a wide range of examples, differing so greatly in the nature of the signification and in the degree of abstraction of the idea, or its remoteness from the direct perceptions of sense, as to satisfy us that the principles employed are adequate to the expression of every kind of thought. And this is sufficient for the rational theorist of language. If man can anyhow have stumbled into speech under the guidance of his ordinary intelligence, it will be absurd to suppose that he was helped over the first steps of his progress by some supernatural go-cart, in the shape either of direct inspiration, or, what comes to the same thing, of an instinct unknown to us at the present day, but lent for a while to Primitive Man in order to enable him to communicate with his fellows, and then withdrawn when its purpose was accomplished.

Perhaps after all it will be found that the principal obstacle to belief in the rational origin of Language, is an excusable repugnance to think of Man as having ever been in so brutish a condition of life as is implied in the want of speech. Imagination has always delighted to place the cradle of our race in a golden age of innocent enjoyment, and the more rational views of what the course of life must have been before the race had acquired the use of significant speech, or had elaborated for themselves the most necessary arts of subsistence, are felt by unreflecting piety as derogatory to the dignity of Man and the character of a beneficent Creator. But this is a dangerous line of thought, and the only safe rule in speculating on the possible dispensations of Providence (as has been well pointed out by Mr Farrar) is the observation of the various conditions in which it is actually allotted to Man (without any choice of his own) to carry on his life. What is actually allowed to happen to any family of Man cannot be incompatible either with the goodness of God or with His views of the dignity of the human race. And God is no respecter of persons or of races. However hard or degrading the life of the Fuegian or the Bushman may appear to us, it can be no impeachment of the Divine love to suppose that our own progenitors were exposed to a similar struggle.

We have only the choice of two alternatives. We must either suppose that Man was created in a civilised state, ready instructed in the arts necessary for the conduct of life, and was permitted to fall back into the degraded condition which we witness among savage tribes; or else, that he started from the lowest grade, and rose towards a higher state of being, by the accumulated acquisitions in arts and knowledge of generation after generation, and by the advantage constantly given to superior capacity in the struggle for life. Of these alternatives, that which embodies the notion of continued progress is most in accordance with all our experience of the general course of events, notwithstanding the apparent stagnation of particular races, and the barbarism and misery occasionally caused by violence and warfare. We have witnessed a notable advance in the conveniences of life in our own time, and when we look back as far as history will reach, we find our ancestors in the condition of rude barbarians. Beyond the reach of any written records we have evidence that the country was inhabited by a race of hunters (whether our progenitors or not) who sheltered in caves, and carried on their warfare with the wild beasts with the rudest weapons of chipped flint. Whether the owners of these earliest relics of the human race were speaking men or not, who shall say ? It is certain only that Language is not the innate inheritance of our race; that it must have begun to be acquired by some definite generation in the pedigree of Man; and as many intelligent and highly social kinds of animals, as elephants, for instance, or beavers, live in harmony without the aid of this great convenience of social life, there is no apparent reason why our own race should not have led their life on earth for an indefinite period before they acquired the use of speech; whether before that epoch the progenitors of the race ought to be called by the name of Man, or not.

Geologists however universally look back to a period when the earth was peopled only by animal races, without a trace of human existence; and the mere absence of Man among an animal population of the world is felt by no one as repugnant to a thorough belief in the providential rule of the Creator. Why then should such a feeling be roused by the complementary theory which bridges over the interval to the appearance of Man, and supposes that one of the races of the purely animal period was gradually raised in the scale of intelligence, by the laws of variation affecting all procreative kinds of being, until the progeny, in the course of generations, attained to so enlarged an understanding as to become capable of appreciating each other's motives; of being moved to admiration and love by the exhibition of loving courage, or to indignation and hate by malignant conduct; of finding enjoyment or pain in the applause or reprobation of their fellows, or of their own reflected thoughts; and sooner or later, of using imitative signs for the purpose of bringing absent things to the thoughts of another mind ?
TABLE OF CONTRACTIONS.
AS. Anglo-Saxon.
Ælfr. Gr. Ælfric's Grammar at the end of Somner's Dict.
B. Bailey's Engl. Dict., 1737.
Bav. Bavarian.
Bigl. Biglotton seu Dict. Teutonico-Lat. 1654.
Boh. Bohemian or Czech.
Brem. Wtb. Bremisch-Nieder-Sächsiches Wörterbuch, 1768.
Bret. Bas-Breton or Celtic of Brittany.
Carp. Carpentier, Supplement to Ducange, 1766.
Castr. Couzinié, Dict. de la langue Romano-Castraise, 1850.
Cat. Catalan.
Cimbr. Cimbrisch, dialect of the Sette Commune.
Cot. Cotgrave, Fr.-Eng. Dict.
Da. or Dan. Danish.
dial. Provincial dialect.
Dief. Diefenbach, Vergleichendes Wörterbuch der Gothischen Sprache, 1851.
Dief. Sup. Diefenbach, Supplement to Ducange, 1857.
Du. Dutch.
Duc. Ducange, Glossarium Mediæ et Infimæ Latinitatis.
D.V. Douglas' Virgil.
E. English.
Esth. Esthonian.
Fin. Finnish.
Fl. Florio, Italian-Eng. dict. 1680.
F.Q. Faery Queen.
Fr. French.
Fris. Frisian.
G. German.
Gael. Gaelic.
Grandg Grandgagnage, Dict. de la langue Wallonne, 1845.
Gris. Romansch, Rhæto-Romance, or language of the Grisons.
Hal. Halliwell's Dict. of Archaic and Provincial words, 1852.
Idiot. Idioticon or Vocabulary of a dialect.
Illyr. Illyrian.
Jam. Jamieson, Dict. of Scottish Language.
K. or Kil. Kilian, Dict. Teutonico-Lat.
Küttn. Küttner's Germ.-Eng. Dict., 1805.
Lang. Dict. Languedocien-Franç. par Mr L. S. D., 1785.
Lap. Lapponic or language of Lapland.
Lat. Latin.
Let. Lettish.
Lim. Beronie, Dict. du patois du Bas-Limousin (Corrèze).
Lith. Lithuanian.
Magy. Hungarian or Magyar.
MHG. Middle High German.

Mid.Lat. Latin of the Middle Ages.
N. Norwegian or Norse.
O. Old.
OHG. Old High German.
ON. Old Norse, Icelandic.
Palsgr. Palsgrave, l'Esclaircissement de la langue Françoise.
Pat. de Brai. Dict. du patois du Pays de Brai, 1852.
Piedm. Piedmontese.
Pl.D. Platt Deutsch, Low German dialects.
Pol. Polish.
P.P. Piers Plowman.
Prov. Provençal.
Pr.Pm. Promptorium Parvulorum.
Ptg. Portuguese.
R. Richardson's Eng. Dict.
Rayn. Raynouard, Dict. Provençal, 1836.
Roquef. Roquefort, Gloss. de la Langue Romaine.
Rouchi Patois of the Hainault.
Hécourt, Dict. Rouchi-
Franç.
R.R. Chaucer's translation of the Roman de la Rose Russ. Russian.
Sc. Lowland Scotch.
Schm. Schmeller, Bayerisches
Wörterbuch.
Serv. Servian.
Sp. Spanish.
Sw. Swedish.
Swab. Swabian.
Swiss Rom. Swiss Romance, the Fr. patois of Switzerland.
Venet. Venetian.
W. Welsh.
Walach. Walachian or Daco-Romance.
Wall. Walloon.
ERRATA.
Lines with * affixed are counted from the bottom.
Pa.   col. line                                Pa.   col. line
xv    2   2        for Oehrlauderr. r. Oehrlander      204   1   28   for doda r. döda
xx        13       mamoo-heeheek r. ma-                214   1   16   dundi r. dunda
mookheehee                          218   1   21   daguaucho r. aguaducho
xxvii 2*  note r. rate                                 219   2   26*  talkickt r. talkicht
xlvii 7   puliti r. puliti                             226   2   10   dele, after ream
3     1   25       bette r. bette                      233   2   30   or-matk r. ör-matk
14    1   35       sadalen r. sadelen                  235   2   9    paaw r. paaw
21    1   2*       alieni r. alicui                    236   1   18   kymmenta r. kymmenta
26    2   6        sveritet r. sverdit                 242   1   22   scapare r. scapa
28    1   6*       Asknace r. Askance                  260   2   22*  flmm r. fimm
30    1   1        woud r. word                        262   1   16*  fiatch r. flatch
—         12       allager r. alléger                  265   1   16   floda r. floda
33    1   39       ahaverie r. haverie                 271   1   22   averted r. diverted
37    1   4*       cam r. com                          278   2   1* & 2* frata r. frata
43    2   24       baltresac r. baltresca              284   2   31   Gaffar r. Gaffer
55    1   10*      nokkutomar. r. nokkutama            285   1   17   leo r. les
59    1   22*      willekem r. willekom                287   2   13*  loucrare r. loucrá
72    1   45       Blab r. Blob                        289   2   4    Ratt r. Ratt
77    1   22*      plowied r. plowied                  312   1   1    gores r. gores
85    1   23       budowaer. r. budowad                313   1   5    graz'us r. grazus
88    2   14 & 21  for dor read dor                    —         —    graz'ilas r. grasilas
100   2   3*       kilistaa r. kilistaa                315   2   23*  krof r. kraf
111   1   13*      bugiie r. buque                     322   1   3    grod r. gröd
118   2   10*      brodiquin r. brodequin              323   1   15   ealley r. fealley
134   1   8*       katowae r. katowae                  325   2   11   gatta r. gáttah
141   2   10*      percurrunt r. percurrunt            338   1   30   Jonan r. Johan
146   2   1*       kimista r. kimista                  —         33   celebrare r. celebrari
147   1   2        kumista r. kumista                  341   2   5    dele drive
—         5        komista r. komista                  342   2   24*  sapa'us r. sap'dus
—         7        χίμαιρα r. χίμαιρα                  347   1   6    hau r. han
159   2   7        comelia r. comelid                  349   1   8*   eidiadh r. eideadh
178   1   28       head r. hand                        359   1   12*  d'av- r. d'av-
186   1   2        trutle r. treetle                   360   2   19*  nias r. niais
192   1   13*      dele '                              361   1   8*   Jans r. Hans
—         34       curccio r. cruccio                  362   2   29   pa r. pa
195   2   21*      deyrie, woman r. deyrie-            364   1   11*  a' r. d'
woman                               367   1   15*  kat r. kat
203   2   15       doda r. döda                        380   1   20*  pa r. pa
—         29       doda r. döda                        382   2   15   sa r. sa
—         16       doe r. döe

Pa. col. line 382 2 15 for låte r. låte — 2 16 låten r. låten 390 1 28* på r. på — 1 24* ? r. .
— 2 19* salunda r. salunda — 2 9* lengom r. engom 391 2 7 på r. på — 2 12 reglisses, r. reglisse, — 1 21 laspa r. läspa 398 1 20* schloti r. schlott 403 1 6 loullour r. loudour 408 1 24 madde r. madde 411 2 14* mazgaé r. masgaé 415 2 19 betide r. betidde 416 1 13 wyry r. wyryf 418 1 9* argente r. argento — 2 6* moczyć r. moczyć 425 2 10 -redom r. tredon 448 1 29* Anson r. Auson 463 2 11* d'une r. d'une 467 1 13* χλζάω r. χλάζω — 2 15 pedanto r. pedante 469 1 2* septum r. septum, 472 2 15 trick. r. trick, 478 2 14* macken r. machen 495 1 22* principo r. principe 513 2 20 koden r. köden — 2 7* rampelen r. rompelen 530 2 22 råg r. råj — 2 23 rågan r. råjan 532 2 7 remodero r. remordeo 534 1 18 sembarre r. sembrare 537 2 24 ruffaae r. ruffare 539 1 20 bunk r. buuk 540 1 4 albi r. labi 558 2 14* chaetse r. schaetse 566 2 13 scrur r. scruf 568 2 23* for vrå r. vrå 580 2 13 kilina r. kilina 583 1 24 skåp r. skåp 587 2 7 får r. för 595 2 27 piskslang r. piskslang 597 2 6 slagga r. slagga 598 2 26 sibly's r. sybil's 599 2 21* slödra r. slödra 600 1 20* bart r. bårt — 1 19* förbi r. förbi — 2 10* nagot r. något 601 1 4* sloejhose r. sloefhose 604 1 9 debaub r. bedaub 607 2 6 scamutzeln r. schmutzeln 609 1 7* nagot r. något 613 2 21 schneppen r. schnappen 615 2 6* buzowaé r. buzować 616 2 30 oars r. ears 621 2 21* besolen r. besölen 675 1 9 toma r. tomma 678 2 33 ati r. an 685 2 13 Hanneberg r. Henneberg 714 1 24 nagot r. något — 2 5* Walscher r. Wälscher — 2 4* walschen r. wälschen 729 2 12* Ah r. Åh — 2 11* wikka r. wikkeh 734 1 13 gå r. gå — 2 9 vyju r. wyju — 2 8* vytti r. tytti 736 1 8* gå r. gå
DICTIONARY
OF
ENGLISH ETYMOLOGY.
An asterisk (*) is prefixed to words where the etymology of the first edition has been materially altered.

A, as a prefix to nouns, is commonly the remnant of the AS. on, in, on, among, as aback, AS. on-bæc; away, AS. on-wæg; alike, AS. on-lic.

In the obsolete adown it represents the AS. of, or from; AS. of-dune, literally, from a height, downwards.

As a prefix to verbs it corresponds to the Goth. us, out of; OHG. ur, ar, er, ir; G. er, implying a completion of the action.

Thus G. erwachen, to awake, is to wake up from a state of sleep; to abide, is to wait until the event looked for takes place; to arise, to get up from a recumbent posture.

Ab-, Abs-, A- In Lat. compounds, away, away from, off. To abuse is to use in a manner other than it should be; ablution, a washing off; to abstain, to hold away from. Lat. a, ab, abs, from.

Abaft. AS. æftan, be-æftan, bæftan, after, behind. Hence on-bæftan, abaft. The word seems very early to have acquired the nautical use in which alone it survives at the present day.
Every man shewid his connyng tofore the ship and baft.—Chaucer, Beryn. 843.

Abandon. Immediately from Fr. abandonner, and that from the noun andon (also adopted in English, but now obsolete), command, orders, dominion. The word Ban is common to all the languages of the Teutonic stock in the sense of proclamation, announcement, &c. remaining with us in the restricted application to Banns of Marriage. Passing into the Romance tongues, this word became bando in Italian and Spanish, an edict or proclamation, bandon in French, in the same sense, and secondarily in that of command, orders, dominion, power: Than Wallace said, Thou spekis of mychty thing, Fra worthi Bruce had resavit his crown, I thoucht have maid Ingland at his bandown, So wttrely it suld beyn at his will, What plesyt him, to sauff the king or spill.
Wallace.

Hence to embandon or abandon is to bring under the absolute command or entire control of any one, to subdue, rule, have entire dominion over.

And he that thryll (thrall) is is nocht his, All that he has embandownyt is Unto his Lord, whatever he be.—Bruce, i. 244.

He that dredeth God wol do diligence to plese God by his werkes and abandon himself with all his might well for to do.—Parson's Tale.

Thus we see that the elliptical expression of 'an abandoned character,' to which the accident of language has attached the notion of one enslaved to vice, might in itself with equal propriety have been used to signify devotion to good.

Again, as that which is placed at the absolute command of one party must by the same act be entirely given up by the original possessor, it was an easy step from the sense of conferring the command of a thing upon some particular person, to that of renouncing all claim to authority over the subject matter, without particular reference to the party into whose hands it might come; and thus in modern times the word has come to be used almost exclusively in the sense of renunciation or desertion. 'Dedicio—abaundunement,' the surrender of a castle.—Neccham.
The adverbial expressions at abandon, abandonly, abandounly, so common in the 'Bruce' and 'Wallace' like the OFr. à son bandon, à bandon, may be explained, at his own will and pleasure, at his own impulse, uncontrolledly, impetuously, determinedly. 'Ainsi s'avancerent de grand volonté tous chevaliers et écuyers et prirent terre.'—Froiss. vol. iv. c. 118.
To Abash. Originally, to put to confusion from any strong emotion, whether of fear, of wonder, shame, or admiration, but restricted in modern times to the effect of shame. Abash is an adoption of the Fr. esbahir, as sounded in the greater number of the inflections, esbahissons, esbahissais, esbahissant. In order to convert the word thus inflected into English it was natural to curtail merely the terminations ons, ais, ant, by which the inflections differed from each other, and the verb was written in English to abaisse or abaish, as ravish, polish, furnish, from ravir, polir, fournir.
Many English verbs of a similar derivation were formerly written indifferently with or without a final sh, where custom has rendered one or other of the two modes of spelling obsolete. Thus obey was written obeisse or obeyshe; betray, betrash.
Speaking of Narcissus stooping to drink, Chaucer writes: In the water anon was sene His nose, his mouth, his eyen shene, And he thereof was all abashed.
His owne shadow had him betrashed; For well he wened the forme to see Of a childe of full grete beauti.—R. R. 1520.
In the original— Et il maintenant s'esbahit Car son umbre si le trahit Car il cuida voir la figure D'ung enfant bel a demesure.
On the other hand, burny was formerly in use as well as burnish; abay or abaw as well as abaisse or abaish: I saw the rose when I was nigh, It was thereon a goodly sight— For such another as I gesse Aforne ne was, ne more vermeille, I was abawid for merveille.—R. R. 3645.
In the original— Moult m'esbahis de la merveille.
Yield you madame en hicht can Schir Lust say, A word scho could not speik scho was so abaid.
K. Hart in Jamieson.
Custom, which has rendered obsolete betrash and obeish, has exercised her authority in like manner over abay or abaw, burny, astony.
The origin of esbahir itself is to be found in the OFr. baer, beer, to gape, an onomatopoeia from the sound Ba, most naturally uttered in the opening of the lips. Hence Lat. Baba! Mod. Prov. Bah! the interjection of wonder; and the verb esbahir, in the active form, to set agape, confound, astonish, to strike with feelings the natural tendency of which is to manifest itself by an involuntary opening of the mouth. Castrais, fa baba, to excite admiration.—Cousin. id. Zulu babaza, to astonish, to strike with wonder or surprise.
In himself was all his state More solemn than the tedious pomp which waits On princes, when their rich retinue long Of horses led, and grooms besmeared with gold, Dazzles the crowd, and sets them all agape.
Milton.
Wall. bawi, to look at with open mouth; esbawi, to abaw or astonish.—Grandg. See Abide.
To Abate. Fr. abbattre, to beat down, to ruin, overthrow, cast to the ground, Cotgr. Wall. abate, faire tomber, (Grandg.); It. abbattere, to overthrow, to pull down, to make lower, depress, weaken, to diminish the force of anything; abbattere le vela, to strike sail; abbattere dal prezzo, to bate something of the price; abbatersi, to light upon, to hit, to happen, to meet with; abbatersi in una terra, to take possession of an estate. Hence the OE. law term abatement, which is the act of one who intrudes into the possession of lands void by the death of the former possessor, and not yet taken up by the lawful heir; and the party who thus pounces upon the inheritance is called an abator. See Beat, Bate.
Abbot, Abbey, Abbess. More correctly written abbat, from Lat. abbas, abbatis, and that from Syrian abba, father. The word was occasionally written abba in Latin. It was a title of respect formerly given to monks in general, and it must have been during the time that it had this extended signification that it gave rise to the Lat. abbatia, an abbey, or society of abbots or monks.

Epiphanius, speaking of the Holy places, says, ἔχει δὲ ἡ αὐτὴ ἀββάδες χιλίους καὶ χίλια κέλλια, it contains a thousand monks and a thousand cells.—Ducange.

In process of time we meet with protestations from St Jerome and others against the arrogance of assuming the title of Father, and either from feelings of such a nature, or possibly from the analogy between a community of monks and a private family, the name of Abbot or Father was ultimately confined to the head of the house, while the monks under his control were called Brothers.

Abele. The white poplar. Pol. białodrzew, literally white tree, from biało, white.

* To Abet. OFr. abetter, to deceive, also to incite; inciter, animer, exciter.—Roquef. Prov. abet, deceit, trick; abetar, to deceive, beguile.

Lui ne peut-il mie guiler, Ni engigner ni abiter.—Fabl. II. 366.

Both senses of the word may be explained from Norm. abet, Guernsey beth, a bait for fish; beter, Norm. abéter, to bait the hook.—Héricher, Gloss. Norm.

From the sense of baiting springs that of alluring, tempting, inciting, on the one hand, and alluring to his own destruction, deceiving, beguiling on the other. See Bait.

Abeyance. OFr. abéiance; droit en abéiance, a right in suspense; abeyance, expectation, desire.—Gloss. de Champ.

From abahier, abaier, abayer, to be intent upon, to desire earnestly, to expect, wait, watch, listen. See Abide.

To Abide, Abie. Goth. beidan, usbeidan, to expect; gabeidan, to endure; usbeisns, expectation; usbeisnei, endurance, forbearance. AS. bidan, abidan, to expect, wait, bide; ON. bíða, to wait, endure, suffer; b. bana, to suffer death; Dan. bie, Du. beijden, beijen, verbeijen (Bosworth), to wait. We have seen under Abash that the involuntary opening of the mouth under the influence of astonishment was represented by the syllable ba, from whence in the Romance dialects are formed two series of verbs, one with and one without the addition of a terminal d to the radical syllable.

Thus we have It. badare, badigliare, to gape, to yawn. Cat. and Prov. badar, to open the mouth, to open; bader, ouvrir (Vocab. de Berri); Prov. gola badada, It. bocca badata, with open mouth; Cat. badia, a bay or opening in the coast.

Without the terminal d we have baer, baier, béer, with the frequentative bailler, to open the mouth, to gape; gueule bée, bouche béante, as gola badada, bocca badata above mentioned.

Quant voit le serpent, qui saaille, Corant sens lui, gueule baie.—Raynouard.

Both forms of the verb are then figuratively applied to signify affections characterized by involuntary opening of the mouth, intent observation, or absorption in an object, watching, listening, expectation, waiting, endurance, delay, suffering. It. badare, to attend to, to mind, to take notice, take care, to desire, covet, aspire to, to stay, to tarry, to abide; abbadare, to stay, to attend on; bada, delay, lingering, tarrying; tenere a bada, to keep in suspense. Corresponding forms with the d effaced are OFr. baer, baier, béer, to be intent upon, attendre avec empressement, aspirer, regarder, songer, desirer (Roquef.); abayer, écouter avec étonnement, bouche béante, inhiare loquenti (Lacombe).

I saw a smith stand with his hammer—thus—The whilst his iron did on the anvil cool, With open mouth swallowing a tailor's news. K. John.

Here we have a good illustration of the connection between the figure of opening the mouth and the ideas of rapt attention, waiting, suspense, delay. The verb attend, which in E. signifies the direction of the mind to an object, in Fr. attendre signifies to suspend action, to wait. In other cases the notion of passive waiting is expressed by the figure of looking or watching. Thus G. warten, to wait, is identical with It. guardare, to look, and E. wait was formerly used in the sense of look.

The passage which in our translation is 'Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another,' is in AS. 'we sceolon othres abidan.' The effacement of the d in Du. beijen, in Dan. bie compared with Sw. bida, and in E. abie, compared with abide, is precisely analogous to that in Fr. béer, baier compared with It. badare, abadare, or in Fr. crier compared with It. gridare.

Certes (quoth she) that is that these wicked shrewes be more blissful that abien the torments that they have deserved than if no pain of Justice ne chastised them.—Chaucer, Boethius.

At sight of her they sudden all arose In great amaze, ne wist what way to chuse. But Jove all fearless forced them to aby.—F. Q.

It is hardly possible to doubt the identity of E. abie, to remain or endure, with the verb of abeyance, expectation or suspense, which is certainly related to It.

badare, as E. abide to Goth. beidan, AS. bidan. Thus the derivation of badare above explained is brought home to E. bide, abide, abie.
ABIE, 2. Fundamentally distinct from abie in the sense above explained, although sometimes confounded with it, is the verb abie, properly abuy, and spelt indifferently in the older authors abegge, abeye, abigg, abidge, from AS. abicgan, abycgan, to redeem, to pay the purchase-money, to pay the penalty, suffer the consequences of anything; and the simple buy, or bie, was often used in the same sense.
Sithe Richesse hath me failed here, She shall abie that trespass dere.—R. R.
Algate this selie maide is slaine alas! Alas! to dere abought she her beaute. Doctor's Tale.
Thou slough my brother Morgan At the mete full right As I am a doughti man His death thou bist (buyest) tonight. Sir Tristrem.
For whoso hardy hand on her doth lay It derely shall abie, and death for handsel pay. Spenser, F. Q.
And when he fond he was yhurt, the Pardoner he gan to threte. And swore by St Amyas that he should abigg With strokes hard and sore even upon the rigg. Prol. Merch. 2nd Tale.
Ac for the lesynge that thou Lucifer lowe til Eve Thou shalt abyggc bitter, quoth God, and bond him with cheynes.—P. P.
To buy it dear, seems to have been used as a sort of proverbial expression for suffering loss, without special reference to the notion of retribution.
The thingis fellin as they done of werre Betwixtin hem of Troie and Grekis ofte, For some day boughtin they of Troie it dere And efte the Grekis foundin nothing softe The folke of Troie. Tr. and Cr.
It will be seen from the foregoing examples how naturally the sense of buying or paying the purchase-money of a thing passes into that of simply suffering, in which the word is used in the following passages.
O God, forbid for mother's fault The children should abye.—Boucher.
If he come into the hands of the Holy Inquisition, he must abye for it.—Boucher. i. e. must suffer for it. The connection between the ideas of remaining or continuance in time and continuance under suffering or pain is apparent from the use of the word endurance in both applications. In this way both abide and its degraded form abie come to signify suffer.

Thus abie for abuy and abie from abide are in certain cases confounded together, and the confusion sometimes extends to the use of abide in the sense of abuying or paying the penalty.
If it be found so some will dear abide it. Jul. Cæsar.
How dearly I abide that boast so vain. Milton, P. L.
Disparage not the faith thou dost not know. Lest to thy peril thou abide it dear. Mids. N. Dr.
ABLE. Lat. habilis (from habeo, to have; have-like, at hand), convenient, fit, adapted; Fr. habile, able, strong, powerful, expert, sufficient, fit for anything he undertakes or is put unto.—Cotgr. It. abile; Prov. abilh.
It will be remarked on looking at a series of quotations that in the earlier instances the sense of the Lat. habilis is closely preserved, while in later examples the meaning is confined to the case of fitness by possession of sufficient active power.
God tokeneth and assigneth the times, atting hem to her proper offices.—Chaucer, Boeth.
In the original, Signat tempora propriis Aptans officiis Deus.
That if God willing to schewe his wrathe, and to make his power knowne, hath suffered in grete pacience vessels of wrathe able unto death, &c.—Wickliff in Richardson.
To enable a person to do a thing or to disable him, is to render him fit or unfit for doing it. Divers persons in the House of Commons were attainted, and therefore not legal nor habilitate to serve in Parliament, being disabled in the highest degree.—Bacon in R.
The Fr. habiller is to qualify for any purpose, as habiller du chanvre, de la volaille, to dress hemp, to draw fowls, to render them fit for use; whence habiliments are whatever is required to qualify for any special purpose, as habiliments of war; and the most general of all qualifications for occupation of any kind being simply clothing, the Fr. habillement has become appropriated to that special signification.
ABOARD. For on board, within the walls of a ship. ON. bord, a board, the side of a ship. Innan bords, within the ship, on board; at kasta fyri bord, to throw overboard.
ABOLISH. Fr. abolir, from Lat. aboleo, to erase or annul. The neuter form abolesco, to wear away, to grow out of use, to perish, when compared with brocher, to pierce. To set a tun abroach is to pierce it, and so to place it in condition to draw off the contents.
Right as who set a tonne abroche He perced the hard roche. Gower in Richardson.
Wall, abrochi, mettre en perce. Grandg. See Broach.
Abroad. On broad, spread over the surface, far and wide, and hence arbitrarily applied in the expression of going abroad to going beyond the limits of one's own country.
But it (the rose) ne was so sprede on brede. That men within might know the sede. R. R.
Abscess. Lat. abscessus, Fr. absces, a course of ill humours running out of their veins and natural places into the empty spaces between the muscles. Cotgr. From abscedere, to retire, withdraw, draw to a head. See Cess.
To Abscond. To withdraw for the purpose of concealment; Lat. abscondo, to hide away; condo, to put by.
To Absorb. Lat. ab and sorbeo, to suck up. See Sherbet.
To Abstain. Abstemious. Lat. abstineo, to hold back from an object of desire, whence abstemious, having a habit of abstaining from. Vini abstemius, Pliny, abstaining from wine. So Fr. étamer, to tin, from étain.
Absurd. Not agreeable to reason or common sense. Lat. absurdus. The figure of deafness is frequently used to express the failure of something to serve the purpose expected from things of its kind. Thus ON. daufr, deaf; daufr litr, a dull colour; a deaf nut, one without a kernel; Fr. lanterne sourde, a dark lantern. So Lat. surdus, deaf; surdus locus, a place ill adapted for hearing; surda vota, unheard prayers. Absurdum, what is not agreeable to the ears, and fig. to the understanding.
Est hoc auribus, animisque hominum absurdum. Cic.
To Abut. Fr. bout, end: aboutir, to meet end to end, to abut. But bout itself is from OFr. boter, botter, boutir, to strike, corresponding to E. butt, to strike with the head, as a goat or ram. It is clear that the full force of the metaphor is felt by Shakespeare when he speaks of France and England as two mighty monarchies. Whose high upreared and abutting fronts The narrow perilous ocean parts asunder.
Abuttals or boundaries are translated capita in mid. Lat., and abut, capitare.

ACCOUTRE In the same way the G. stossen, to thrust, butt, push with the horns, &c., is also applied to the abutting of lands. Ihre Länder stossen an einander, their lands abut on each other. So in Swedish stöta, to strike, to thrust, to butt as a goat; stöta tillsammans, to meet together, to abut.
Abyss. Gr. ἄβυσσος, unfathomable, from ἀ and βυσσός or βυθός, depth.
Academy. Gr. ἀκαδημία, a garden in the suburbs of Athens where Plato taught.
Accede. Access. Accessory. Lat. accedere, accessum, to go or come to, to arrive at, approach. To support, to be of the party or side of any one, to assent to, to approve of. Hence accessory, an aider or abetter in a crime. See Cede.
Fr. accès from accessus, a fit or sudden attack of a disorder, became in OE. axesse, pl. axes, still preserved in the provincial axes, the ague. Halliwell.
A charm— The which can helen thee of thine axesse. Tro. and Cress. 2, 1315.
Accent. Lat. accentus, modulation of the voice, difference in tone, from accino, accentum, to sing to an instrument, to accord. See Chant.
Accomplice. Fr. complice, Lat. complex, bound up with, united with one in a project, but always in a bad sense.
Accomplish. Fr. accomplir, Lat. complere, to fill up, fulfil, complete.
Accord. Fr. accorder, to agree. Formed in analogy to the Lat. concordare, discordare, from concors, discors, and consequently from cor, the heart, and not chorda, the string of a musical instrument. Diez. The Swiss Romance has cordere, cordre, synonymous with G. gönnen, to consent heartily with what falls to another; Wall. keure, voir de bon gré qu'un événement arrive à quelqu'un, qu'une chose ait lieu; meskeure, missgönnen. Grandg.
To Accost. Lat. costa, a rib, a side; Fr. coste, a rib, coste, now côté, a side; coste-à-coste, side by side. Hence accoster, to join side to side, approach, and thence to greet.
Accoutre. From the Fr. accoutrer, formerly accoustrer, to equip with the habiliments of some special office or occupation,—an act of which in Catholic countries the frequent change of vestments at appointed periods of the church service would afford a striking and familiar example. Now the person who had charge of the vestments in a Catholic church, was the sacristan; in Lat. custos sacrarii or ecclesiae (barbarously rendered custrix, when the office was filled by woman), in OFr. cousteur or coustre, coutre; Ger. küster, the sacristan, or vestry-keeper.— Ludwig.
Ad custodem sacrarii pertinet cura vel custodiuin templi—vela vestesque sacrae, ac vasa sacrorum.—St Isidore in Ducange.
The original meaning of accoutrer would thus be to perform the office of sacristan to a priest, to invest him with the habiliments of his office; afterwards to invest with the proper habiliments of any other occupation.

Accrue. Fr. accroitre, accru, from Lat. crescere, to grow. Thence accrue, a growth, increase, Cotgr., and E. accrue, to be in the condition of a growth, to be added to something as what naturally grows out of it.

Ace. Fr. as. It. asso, the face marked with the number one on cards or dice, from Lat. as, assis, which signifies a single one.—Diez.

Achromatic. Producing an image free from iridescent colours. Gr. a, privative, and χρῶμα, colour.

Ache. A bodily pain, from Ach! the natural expression of pain. So from G. ach! alas! the term is applied to woe, grief. Mein ach ist deine freude, my woe is your joy.—Kütten. Achen, to utter cries of grief. The Gr. ἄχος, pain, grief, is formed on the same principle.

To Achieve. Prov. cap, Fr. chef, head, and thence the end of everything; de chief en chief, from end to end; venir à chef, to gain one's end, to accomplish; Prov. acabar, Fr. achever, to bring to a head, to accomplish, achieve.

Acid.—Acrid.—Acerbity. Lat. aceo, to be sharp or sour; acor, sourness; acidus, sour, tart; acetum, vinegar, sour wine. From the same root acer, acris, sharp, biting, eager; acredo, acrimonia, sharpness; acerbus, sharp, bitter, sour like an unripe fruit. See Acute.

Acme. Gr. ἀκμή, a point: the highest degree of any quality. See Acute.

Acolyte. Gr. ἀκόλουθος, an attendant, ἀκολουθέω, to follow, attend.

Acorn. AS. æcern, æceren, accern; ON. akarn; Dan. agern; Du. aker; G. ecker, eichel; Goth. akran, fruit. The last of the AS. spellings shows us an early accommodation to the notion of oak-corn, a derivation hardly compatible with the other Teutonic and Scandinavian forms, or with the more general signification of Goth. akran, notwithstanding Grimm's quotation of Cajus, Glandis appellatione omnis fructus continetur. Grimm is himself inclined to explain akran, fruit, as the produce of the akr, or corn-field, but a more satisfactory derivation may probably be found in OHG. wuocher, increase, whence G. wucher, ON. okr, interest, usury, from the same root with Lat. augere, Goth. aukan, to increase; erde-wucher, the increase of the field, fruits of the earth.—Notker. The ON. okran, fœneratio, is formally identical with Goth. akran.

Acoustic. Gr. ἀκουστικός, connected with hearing; ἀκούω, to hear.

To Acquaint. OFr. accointer, Prov. accoindar, to make known; OFr. coint, informed of a thing, having it known, from Lat. cognitus, according to Diez; but this seems one of the cases in which it must be doubtful whether the Romance word comes from a Lat. original, or from a corresponding Teutonic root. The G. has kund (from kennen, to know), known, manifest; kund machen, to make known, in precisely the same sense with the Prov. coindar, the d of which seems better to agree with the G. word than with the Lat. cognitus; G. kundig, having knowledge of a thing.

To Acquit. From Lat. quietus, at rest, was formed Fr. quitte, whence acquitier, to set at rest with respect to some impending claim or accusation. See Quit, Quite.

Acre. Gr. ἀγρός; Lat. ager; Goth. akrs, cultivated land, corn-land. G. acker, a field of cultivated land; thence a measure of land, so much as may be ploughed in a day.

Acrostic.—A poem in which the first letters of the verses compose one or more words, from Gr. ἄκρον, tip, στίχος, a verse.

Act.—Active.—Actor. See Agent.

Acute. The syllable ac is the foundation of many words connected with the idea of sharpness both in Lat. and Gr., as ἀκή, Lat. acies, a point or edge, ἀκίς, -ίδος, a pointed instrument, a sting; Lat. acus, a needle, properly a prick, as shown by the dim. aculeus, a prickle or sting; acuo, to give a point or edge to, to sharpen; acutus, sharpened, sharp. Words from the same source signifying sharpness of a figurative kind are seen under Acid.

Ad-, in composition. Lat. ad, to. In combination with words beginning with c, f, g, l, n, p, r, s, t, the d of ad is assimilated to the following consonant, as in affero for adfero, apparo for adparo, &c.
Adage. Lat. adagium, a proverb.
To Adaw. Two words of distinct meaning and origin are here confounded: 1st, from AS. dagian, dægian, to become day, to dawn, OE. to daw, to dawn, adaw, or adawn, to wake out of sleep or out of a swoon. 'I adawe or adawne as the day doth in the morning when the sonne draweth towards his rising.' 'I adawe one out of a swounde,' 'to dawe from swouning,—to dawne or get life in one that is fallen in a swoune.'—Palsgrave in Halliwell.
A man that waketh of his slepe He may not sodenly wel taken kepe Upon a thing, ne seen it parfitly Til that he be adawed verily.—Chaucer.
So Da. dial. morgne sig, to rouse oneself from sleep, from morgen, morning.
2nd, to reduce to silence, to still or subdue, from Goth. thahan, MHG. dagen, gedagen, to be silent, still; ON. thagga, to silence, lull, hush.
As the bright sun what time his fiery train Towards the western brim begins to draw, Gins to abate the brightness of his beame And fervour of his flames somewhat adawe. F. Q. V. ch. 9.
So spake the bold brere with great disdain, Little him answered the oak again. But yielded with shame and grief adawed, That of a weed he was overcrawed. Shep. Cal.
Hessian dachen, tagen, to allay, to still pain, a storm, &c. 'Der schmerz dacht sich nach und nach.' Dachen, to quell the luxuriance of over-forward wheat by cutting the leaves. Gedaeg, cowed, submissive. 'Der ist ganz gedaeg geworden:' he is quite cowed, adawed. Compare Sp. callar to be silent, to abate, become calm.
To Add. Lat. addere, to put to or unite with, the signification of dare in composition being in general to dispose of an object. Thus reddere, to put back; subdere, to put under; condere, to put by.
Adder. A poisonous snake. AS. ættr, ættern; Pl. D. adder; Bav. atter, ader, adern. ON. eitr-orm, literally poison snake, from eitr, AS. atter, venom (see Atter-cop). The foregoing explanation would be perfectly satisfactory, were it not that a name differing only by an initial n (which is added or lost with equal facility), with a derivation of its own, is still more widely current, with which however Diefenbach maintains the foregoing to be wholly unconnected. Gael. nathair; W. neidr; Goth. nadrs; ON. nadra; OHG natra, nadra; G. natter; AS. nædre, nedder; OE. neddre.
Robert of Gloucester, speaking of Ireland, says, Selde me schal in the lond any foule wormys se For nedres ne other wormes ne mow ther be noght.—p. 43.
Instead of neddre Wickliff uses eddre, as Mandeville ewte for what we now call newt, or the modern apron for OE. napron. In the same way Bret. aer, a serpent, corresponds to Gael. nathair, pronounced naer. It seems mere accident which of the two forms is preserved.
The forms with an initial n are commonly referred to a root signifying to pierce or cut, the origin of Goth. nethla, OHG. nâdal, Bret. nadoz, E. needle, and are connected with W. naddu, and with G. schneiden, to cut. Perhaps the ON. nôtra, to shiver, to lacerate, whence nôtru-gras, a nettle, may be a more probable origin. There is little doubt that the ON. eitr, AS. atter, venom, matter, is from OHG. eiten, to burn.
To Addle. To earn, to thrive.
With goodmen's hogs or corn or hay I addle my ninepence every day.—Hal.
Where ivy embraceth the tree very sore Kill ivy, or tree will addle no more. Tusser in Hal.
ON. oðlask, to get, also, naturaliter procedere, to run its course, to grow, increase. Henni oðladist sottin: the sickness increased. Sw. odla, to till, to cultivate the soil, the sciences, the memory. To earn is to get by cultivation or labour.
ON. oðli, eðli, adal, nature, origin; AS. ethel, native place, country.
Addle. Liquid filth, a swelling with matter in it.—Hal. Rotten, as an addle egg. An addle-pool, a pool that receives the draining of a dunghill. Sw. dial. ko-adel, the urine of cows; adla or ala, mingere, of cows, as in E. to stale, of horses. W. hadlu, to decay, to rot.
Adept. Lat. adipiscor, adeptus, to obtain. Alchymists who have obtained the grand elixir, or philosopher's stone, which gave them the power of transmuting metals to gold, were called adepti, of whom there were said to be twelve always in being.—Bailey. Hence an adept, a proficient in any art.
To Adjourn. Fr. jour, a day; adjourner, to cite one to appear on a certain day, to appoint a day for continuing a business, to put off to another day.
To Adjust. Fr. adjuster, to make to meet, and thence to bring to agreement.

Dès icel jor sont dessevrées Qu'unc puis ne furent adjostées Les osz.—Chron. Norm. 2, 10260.
The bones were severed, which were never afterwards united. See Joust.
Adjutant. One of the officers who assists the commander in keeping the accounts of a regiment. Lat. adjutare, frequentative from adjuvare, to assist; It. aiutante, an assistant; aiutante de campo, an aidecamp.
Admiral. Ultimately from Arab. amir, a lord, but probably introduced into the Western languages from the early Byzantine forms ἀμηρᾶς, ἀμηραῖος, the last of which, as Mr Marsh observes, would readily pass into Mid.Lat. amiralius (with a euphonic l), admiraldus. The initial al of Sp. almirante, OCat. almirall is probably the Arab. article, and the title was often written alamir in the early Spanish diplomacy. Thus, the address of letters of credence given by K. James II. of Aragon in 1301, quoted by Marsh from Capmany, ran,—' Al muy honorado e muy noble alamir Don Mahomat Aben-naçar rey de Granada e de Malaga, y Amiramuçlemin,' and in the same passage the King calls himself Almirante and Captain-general of the Holy Roman Church.
In eo conflicto (i. e. the battle of Antioch in the first crusade) occisus est Cassiani magni regis Antiochiæ filius et duodecim Admiraldi regis Babiloniæ, quos cum suis exercitibus miserat ad ferenda auxilia regi Antiochiæ; et quos Admiral-dos vocant, reges sunt qui provinciis regionum præsunt.—Ducange.
So that aslayne and adreynt twelve princes were ded That me clupeth amyrayls.—R. G. 402.
Adroit. Fr. adroit, handsome, nimble, ready, apt or fit for anything, favourable, prosperous,—Cotgr.; saison adroite, convenient season.—Dict. Rom. From droit, right, as opposed to left, as is shown by the synonymous adextre, adestre, from dexter, explained by Cotgr. in the same terms. We also use dexterous and adroit as equivalent terms. See Direct.
Adulation. Lat. adulari, to fawn, to flatter.
Adult. Lat. adultus, from adolescere, to grow, grow up. See Abolish.
Adultery. Lat. adulter, a paramour, originally probably only a young man, from adultus, grown up, as Swiss bub, a son, boy, paramour or fornicator.—Deutsch. Mundart. 2, 370.
To Advance.—Advantage. Fr. avan-cer, to push forwards, from Fr. avant. It. avanti, before, forwards; Lat. ab ante.

Advantage, something that puts one forwards, gain, profit.
Adventure.—Advent. Lat. advenire, to come up to, to arrive, to happen; ad-ventus, arrival; E. advent, the coming of our Lord upon earth. OFr. advenir, to happen, and thence aventure, a hap-pening, chance, accident, a sense pre-served in E. per adventure, perhaps. The word was specially applied to events as made the subject of poetical or romantic narration, and so passed into the Teutonic and Scandinavian languages, giving rise to G. abenteuer, ON. æfintyr, Sw. afwentyr, OE. aunter, a daring feat, hazardous enterprise, or the relation of such, a romantic story. ' The Aunters of Arthur at Tarnwathelan,' is the title of an old E. romance.
To Advise.—Advice. The Lat. visum, from videri, gave rise to It. visa, OFr. vis. Visum mihi fuit, it seemed to me, would be rendered in OIt. fu viso a me, OFr. ce m'est vis.—Diez. In the Roman de la Rose, advis is used in the same sense,—advis m'estoit, it seemed to me; vous fust advis, it seemed to you. Hence advis. It. avviso, OE. avise, view, sentiment, opinion. Advisedly, avisedly, with full consideration.
The erchbishope of Walys seide ys avyse, ' Sire,' he seide, ' gef ther is any mon so wys That beste red can thereof rede, Merlin that is.'—R. G. 144.
To be avised or advised of a thing would thus be, to have notice of it, to be informed of it. Of werre and of bataile he was full avise. R. Brunne.
Whence advice in the mercantile sense, notice, news.
To advise, in the most usual accepta-tion of the term at the present day, is to communicate our views to another, to give him our opinion for the purpose of guiding his conduct, and advice is the opinion so given.
In OFr. adviser, like It. avvisare, was used in the sense of viewing, per-ceiving, taking note.
Si vy ung songe en mon dormant Qui moult fut bel à adviser.—R. R. 25.
Avise is frequently found in the same sense in our elder authors.
He looked back and her avizing well Weened as he said that by her outward grace That fairest Florimel was present there in place. F.Q.
Advocate. Lat. advocare, to call on or summon one to a place, especially for some definite object, as counsel, aid, &c., to call to one's aid, to call for help, to avail oneself of the aid of some one in a cause. Hence advocatus, one called on to aid in a suit as witness, adviser, legal assistant, but not originally the person who pleaded the cause of another, who was called patronus.

Advowson. From the verb advocare (corrupted to advoare), in the sense ex- plained under Advocate, was formed ad- vocatio (advoatio), OFr. advoeson, the patronage or right of presentation to an ecclesiastical benefice.—Duc.

As the clergy were prohibited from ap- pearing before the lay tribunals, and even from taking oaths, which were always re- quired from the parties in a suit, it would seem that ecclesiastical persons must always have required the service of an advocate in the conduct of their legal business, and we find from the authorities cited by Ducange, that positive enact- ment was repeatedly made by councils and princes, that bishops, abbots, and churches should have good advocates or defenders for the purpose of looking after their temporal interests, defending their property from rapine and imposition, and representing them in courts of law. In the decline of the empire, when defence from violence was more necessary than legal skill, these advocates were natur- ally selected among the rich and power- ful, who alone could give efficient pro- tection, and Charlemagne himself is the advocatus of the Roman Church. ' Quem postea Romani elegerunt sibi advocatum Sancti Petri contra leges Langobardo- rum.'—Vita Car. Mag.

The protection of the Church naturally drew with it certain rights and emolu- ments on the part of the protector, in- cluding the right of presentation to the benefice itself; and the advocatio, or office of advocate, instead of being an elective trust, became a heritable pro- perty. Advocatus became in OFr. advoué, whence in the old Law language of England, advowee, the person entitled to the presentation of a benefice. As it was part of the duty of the guardian or protector to act as patronus, or to plead the cause of the Church in suits at law, the advowee was also called patron of the living, the name which has finally pre- vailed at the present day.

Adze. AS. adesa, ascia. AS. Vocab. in Nat. Ant.

Æsthetics. The science of taste. Gr. αἰσθησις, perception by sense, αἰσθητικος, endued with sense or perception.

AFFRAY Affable.—Affability. Lat. affabilis, that may be spoken to, easy of access or approach. Fari, to speak.

To Affeer. From Lat. forum, a mar- ket, Fr. feur, market-price, fixed rate, whence afferer, or affeurer, to value at a certain rate, to set a price upon. From the latter of these forms the OE. expres- sion to affere an amerciament,—to fix the amount of a fine left uncertain by the court by which it was imposed, the affeerers being the persons deputed to determine the amount according to the circumstances of the case. 'Et quod amerciamenta prædictorum tenentium afferentur et taxentur per sacramentum parium suorum.'—Chart. A.D. 1316, in Duc.

Affiance.—Affidavit. From fides, was formed M. Lat. affidare, to pledge one's faith. Hence affidavit, a certificate of some one having pledged his faith; a written oath subscribed by the party, from the form of the document, 'Affidavit A. B., &c.' The loss of the d, so common in like cases, gave Fr. affier, to affie, to pawn his faith and credit on.—Cotgr. In like manner, from Lat. confidere, Fr. con- fier; from It. disfidare, Fr. defier, to defy.

To Affile, OE. Fr. affiler, It. affilare, to sharpen, to bring to an edge, from Fr. fil, an edge, Lat. filum, a thread.

Affinity. Lat. affinis, bordering on, related to. Finis, end, bound.

To Afford. Formed from the adv. forth, as to utter from out, signifying to put forth, bring forwards, offer. ' I forde as a man dothe his chaffer, je vends, and j'offers a vendre. I canforde it no better cheape. What do you forde it him for ? Pour combien le lui offrez vous a ven- dre ?'—Palsgr.

And thereof was Piers proud, And putte hem to werke, And yaf hem mete as he myghte aforthe, And mesurable hyre.—P. P. 4193.

For thei hadden possessions wher of thei myghten miche more avorthi into almes than thei that hadden litil.—Pe- cock. Repressor 377, in Marsh.

For thon moni mon hit walde him for- jeven half other thridde lot thenne he iseȝe that he ne mahte na mare ȝefor- thian: when he sees that he cannot afford, cannot produce more.— Morris, O.E. Ho- milies, p. 31. Do thine elmesse of thon thet thu maht iforthien : do thy alms of that thou can afford.—Ibid. p. 37.

Affray.—Afraid.—Fray. Fr.effrayer, to scare, appal, dismay, affright; effroi, terror, astonishment, amazement; frayeur, fright, terror, scaring, horror.—Cotgr.
The radical meaning of effrayer is to startle or alarm by a sudden noise, from OFr. effroi, noise, outcry; faire effroi, to make an outcry. 'Toutefois ne fit oncques effroi jusqu'à ce que tous les siens eussent gagné la muraille, puis s'écrie horriblement.'—Rabelais. 'Saillirent de leurs chambres sans faire effroi ou bruit.'—Cent. Nouv. Nouv. Hence E. fray or affray in the sense of a noisy disturbance, a hurlyburly.
In the Flower and the Leaf, Chaucer calls the sudden storm of wind, rain, and hail, which drenched the partisans of the Leaf to the skin, an affray: And when the storm was clene away passed, Tho in the white that stode under the tree They felt nothing of all the great affray, That they in grene without had in ybe.
The radical meaning is well preserved in Chaucer's use of afray to signify rousing out of sleep, out of a swoon, which could not be explained on Diez' theory of a derivation from Lat. frigidus.
Me met thus in my bed all naked And looked forthe, for I was waked With small foules a grete hepe, That had afraide me out of my sleepe, Through noise and swetenesse of her song. Chaucer, Dreame.
I was out of my swowne affraide Whereof I sigh my wittes straide And gan to clepe them home again. Gower in Rich.
The ultimate derivation is the imitative root, frag, representing a crash, whence Lat. fragor, and Fr. fracas, a crash of things breaking, disturbance, affray. Thence effrayer, to produce the effect of a sudden crash upon one, to terrify, alarm. Flagor (for fragor), ekiso (dread, horror).—Gloss. Kero in Diez.
To Affront. Fr. affronter (from Lat. frons, frontis, the forehead), to meet face to face, to encounter, insult. See Front.
After. Goth. Afar, after, behind; aftar, aftaro, behind; aftana, from behind; aftuma, aftumist, last, hindmost. AS. æft, æftan, æfter, afterwards, again. ON. aptan, aftan, behind; aptan dags, the latter part of the day, evening; aftar, aftast, hinder, hindmost. According to Grimm, the final tar is the comparative termination, and the root is simply af, the equivalent of Gr. ἀπό, of, from. Compare after with Goth. afar; AS. ofer-non, with after-noon.
Again. AS. ongean, ongen, agen, opposite, towards, against, again; gean, opposite, against; gean-bæran, to oppose; gean-cyme, an encounter; to-geanes, towards, against. OSw. geij, igen, opposite, again; gena, to meet; genom, through; Bret. gin, opposite; ann tu gin, the other side, wrong side; gin-ouch-gin, directly opposite, showing the origin of the G. reduplicative gegen, against.
Agate. Lat. achates. According to Pliny, from the river Achates in Sicily where agates were found.
Age. From Lat. ætat-em the Prov. has etat, edat; OFr. eded, edage, eage, aage, âge.
Hély esteit de grant eded.—Kings 2. 22.
Ki durerat a trestut ton edage. Chanson de Roland in Diez. Æ, life, age.
The form edage seems constructed by the addition of the regular termination age, to ed, erroneously taken as the radical syllable of eded, or it may be a subsequent corruption of eage, eaige (from æ-tas by the addition of the termination age to the true radical æ), by the inorganic insertion of a d, a modification rendered in this case the more easy by the resemblance of the parallel forms edat, eded.
* Agee. Awry, askew. From jee! an exclamation to horses to make them move on one side. Jee, to turn or move to one side; crooked; awry.—Hal. To jee, to move, to stir. 'He wad na jee.' To move to one side. In this sense it is used with respect to horses or cattle in draught.—Jam.
Agent.—Agile.—Agitate.—Act.—Actual. Lat. ago, actum (in comp. -igo), to drive, to move or stir, to manage, to do; agito, to drive, to stir up, to move to and fro. Actio, the doing of a thing; actus,—ûs, an act, deed, doing.
* To Agg. To provoke, dispute.—Hal. Apparently from nag in the sense of gnaw, by the loss of the initial n. Nagging-pain, a gnawing pain, a slight but constant pain; naggy, knaggy, touchy, irritable, ill-tempered.—Hal. Knagging, finding fault peevishly and irritably.—Mrs B. Sw. dial. nagga, to gnaw, bite, to irritate; agga, to irritate, disturb. ON. nagga, to gnaw, to grumble, wrangle.
* Aghast. Formerly spelt agazed, in consequence of an erroneous impression that the fundamental meaning of the word was set a-gazing on an object of astonishment and horror.
The French exclaimed the devil was in arms, All the whole army stood agazed on him.—H. vi.
Probably the word may be explained from Fris. guwysje, Dan. gyse, Sw. dial. gysa, gasa sig, to shudder at; gase, gust, horror, fear, revulsion. From the last of these forms we pass to Sc. gousty, gous-trous, applied to what impresses the mind with feelings of indefinite horror; waste, desolate, awful, full of the preternatural, frightful.
Cald, mirk, and goustie is the night, Loud roars the blast ayont the hight.—Jamieson. He observed one of the black man's feet to be cloven, and that the black man's voice was hough and goustie.—Glanville in Jam. The word now becomes confounded with ghostly, the association with which has probably led to the insertion of the h in ghastly itself as well as aghast.

Agistment. From Lat. jacere the Fr. had gésir, to lie; whence giste, a lodging, place to lie down in; giste d'une lièvre, the form of a hare. Hence agister, to give lodging to, to take in cattle to feed; and the law term agistment, the profit of cattle pasturing on the land.

Aglet. The tag of a point, i. e. of the lace or string by which different parts of dress were formerly tied up or fastened together. Hence any small object hanging loose, as a spangle, the anthers of a tulip or of grass, the catkins of a hazel, &c.—Junius. Fr. aiguillette, diminutive of aiguille, a needle, properly the point fastened on the end of a lace for drawing it through the eyelet holes; then, like E. point, applied to the lace itself.

Agnail, Angnail. A swelled gland. It. ghiandole, agnels, glandules, wartles or kernels in the flesh or throat, in the groin or armpits.—Fl. Fr. agassin, a corne or agnele in the foot.—Cot. A false etymology seems to have caused the name to be applied also to a sore between the finger and nail. The real origin is It. anguinaglia (Lat. inguen), the groin, also a botch or blain in that place; Fr. angonailles, botches or sores.—Cot.

Ago.—Agone. Here the initial a stands for the OE. y, G. ge, the augment of the past participle; ago, agone, for ygo, ygone, gone away, passed by; long ago, long gone by.
For in swiche cas wimmen have swiche sorwe Whan that hir husbonds ben from hem ago.—Knight's Tale.

Agog. Excited with expectation, jigging with excitement, ready to start in pursuit of an object of desire. Literally on the jog, or on the start, from gog, synonymous with jog or shog; gog-mire, a quagmire.—Hal. 'He is all agog to go.'

—Baker. In the same way in Sc. one is said to be fidging fain, nervously eager, unable to keep still. See Goggle.

Agony. Gr. 'Αγών, as ἀγορά, an assembly, place of assembly, esp. an assembly met to see games; thence the contest for a prize on such an occasion; a struggle, toil, hardship. 'Αγωνία, a contest, gymnastic exercise, agony; ἀγωνίζομαι, to contend with, whence antagonist, one who contends against.

To Agree. From Lat. gratus, pleasing, acceptable, are formed It. grado, Prov. grat, OFr. gret, Fr. gré, will, pleasure, favour; and thence It. agradire, to receive kindly, to please, Prov. agreiar, Fr. agrier, to receive with favour, to give one's consent to, to agree. Prov. agradable, agreeable. See Grant.

Ague. A fever coming in periodical fits or sharp attacks, from Fr. aigu, sharp, fièvre aigue, acute fever. It is a remarkable fact that the Lepchas, when suffering from protracted cold, take fever and ague in sharp attacks.—Hooker, Himalayan Journal.
Se non febre aguda Vos destrenha 'l costats. Si non qu'une fièvre aigue vous presse les côtés.—Raynouard. The confinement to periodical fever is a modern restriction, from the tendency of language constantly to become more specific in its application.
For Richard lay so sore seke. On knees prayden the Crysten host—Through hys grace and hys vertue He turnyd out of his agu.—R. Coer de Lion, 3045.

Aid. Lat. adjuvare, adjutum; adjutare, to help. Prov. adjudar, ajudar, aidar, Fr. aider, to help.

Aidecamp. Fr. aide du camp. It. aiutante di campo, an officer appointed to assist the general in military service.

To Ail. AS. eglian, to pain, to grieve, to trouble, perhaps from the notion of pricking; egle, egla, festuca, arista, carduus—Lye, whence ails, the beard of corn (Essex). AS. egle, troublesome, Goth. aglo, affliction, tribulation, aglus, difficult, agls, shameful.

To Aim. Lat. æstimare, to consider, to reckon, to fix at a certain point or rate; Prov. estimar, to reckon; ædestimar, adesmar, azesmar, aesmar, to calculate, to prepare; 'A son colp azesmat,' he has calculated or aimed his blow well—Diez; esmar, OFr. esmer, to calculate, to reckon—'Li chevaliers de s'ost a treis mille esma.' He reckons the knights of his host at 3000—Rom. de Rou; esmer, to purpose, determine, to offer to strike, to aim or level at.—Cotgr.
Air. Lat. aer, Gr. ἀήρ, doubtless con-tracted from Lat. æther, the heavens, Gr. αἰθήρ, the sky, or sometimes air. Gael. aethar, athar, pronounced ayar, aar, the air, sky, w. awyr.

Aisle. The side divisions of a church, like wings on either side of the higher nave. Fr. aisle, aile, a wing, from Lat. axilla, ala.
By a like analogy, les ailes du nez, the nostrils; les ailes d'une forêt, the skirts of a forest.—Cotgr.

Ait. A small flat island in a river, for eyot, from eye, an island.

Ajar. On char, on the turn, half open, from AS. ceorran, to turn.
Like as ane bull dois rummesing and rare When he eschapis hurt one the altare, And charris by the ax with his neck wycht Gif one the forehede the dynt hittis not richt.
Swiss ackar, Du. aen karre, akerre, ajar.
Ende vonden de dore akerre staende.
Wallewein, 9368.
See Char, Chare.

Akimbo.
The host—set his hond in kenebowe—Wenist thow, seid he to Beryn, for to skorne me?
Beryn, 1105.
It. schembare, sghembare, to go aside from; schimbiccio, a crankling or crooked winding in and out; sedere a schimbiccio, to sit crooked upon one's legs, as tailors do; asghembo, aschembo, aschencio, aslope, askance.—Fl. Du. schampen, to slip, to graze, to glance aside.

Alacrity. Lat. alacer, -cris, eager, brisk; It. allegro, sprightly, merry.

Alarm.—Alarum. It. all' arme, to arms! the call to defence on being sur-prised by an enemy.
This said, he runs down with as great a noise and shouting as he could, crying al'arme, help, help, citizens, the castle is taken by the enemy, come away to defence.—Holland's Pliny in Richardson.
Hence, E. alarum, a rousing signal of martial music, a surprise; Fr. allarmer, to give an alarum unto; to rouse or affright by an alarum—Cotgr.; and gen-erally, to alarm, to excite apprehension.
The alarum, or larum of a clock is a loud ringing suddenly let off for the purpose of rousing one out of sleep. G. Lärm, up-roar, alarm.

Alas. From Lat. lassus, Prov. las, wearied, wretched. Hence the exclama-tions. Las! Ai las! Helas! Ah wretched me! Alas!
M'aviatz gran gaug donat Ai lassa! can pauc m'a durat.—Raynouard.
You have given me great joy, ah wretched me! how little it has lasted.
Las! tant en ai puis soupiré, Et doit estre lasse clamée Quant ele aime sans estre amée.—R. R.

Alchemy. The science of converting base metals into gold. Mid. Gr. ἀρχημία; χημεία.—Suidas. Arab. al-kīmiā, without native root in that language.—Diez.

Alcohol. Arabic, al kohl, the impal-pable powder of antimony with which the Orientals adorn their eyelids, any-thing reduced to an impalpable powder, the pure substance of anything separated from the more gross, a pure well-refined spirit, spirits of wine. To alcoholise, to reduce to an impalpable powder, or to rectify volatile spirit.—B.

Alcove. Sp. alcoba, a place in a room railed off to hold a bed of state; hence a hollow recess in a wall to hold a bed, side-board, &c.; Arab. cobba, a closet (Lane); alcobba, a cabinet or small cham-ber.—Engelberg. Cabrera thinks Sp. alcoba a native word Arabized by the Moors. AS. bed-cofa, vel bur, cubicu-lum.—Elf. Gl. ON. kofi, Da. kove, a hut, a small compartment.

Alder. AS. alr; E. dial. aller, owler; G. eller, erle; Du. els; Sw. al; Pol. olsza, olszyna; Lat. alnus.

Alderman. AS. eald, old; ealdor, an elder, a parent, hence a chief, a ruler. Hundredes ealdor, a ruler of a hundred, a centurion; ealdor-biscop, an archbishop; ealdor-man, a magistrate.

Ale. AS. eale, eala, ealu, aloth; ON. öl; Lith. alus, from an equivalent of Gael. ól, to drink; as Bohem. piwo, beer, from piti, to drink.

Alembic—Lembic. A still. It. lam-bicco, lembicco, Sp. alambique, Arab. al-anbiq; it does not appear, however, that the word admits of radical explanation in the latter language.—Diez.

Alert. Lat. erigere, erectus, It. ergere, to raise up; erta, the steep ascent of a hill; erto, straight, erect; star erto, to stand up; star a l'erta, allerta, to be upon one's guard, literally, to stand upon an eminence. Hence alert, on one's guard, brisk, lively, nimble.
In this place the prince finding his rutters [routiers] alert (as the Italians say), with the ad-vice of his valiant brother, he sent his trumpets to the Duke of Parma.—Sir Roger Williams, a. 1618, in Rich.

Algates. From the NE. gates, ways; ON. gata, a path, Sw. gata, way, street.
All ways, at all events, in one way or another.
Algates by sleight or by violence Fro' year to year I win all my dispense.
Friar's Tale.
Always itself is used in the N. of Eng- land in the sense of however, neverthe- less. — Brocket. Swagaies, in such a manner
Algebra. From Arab. el jabr, putting together. The complete designation was el jabr wa el mogábala, the putting to- gether of parts and equation. From a corruption of these words algebraic cal- culation is called the game of Algebra and Almucgrabala in a poem of the 13th century cited by De Morgan in N. & Q.
Sed quia de ludis fiebat sermo, quid illo Pulcrior esse potest exercitio numerorum, Quo divinantur numeri plerique per unum Ignoti notum, sicut ludunt apud Indos, Ludum dicentes Algébræ almucgrabaUque.
De Vetulâ.
Mogábala, opposition, comparison, equal- ity.—Catafogo.
Alien. Lat. alienus, belonging to another, due to another source; thence, foreign.
To Alight. Dan. lette, Du. ligten (from let, ligt, light), signify to lift, to make light or raise into the air. At lette noget fra jorden, to lift something from the ground. At lette een af sadalen; Du. jemand uit den zadel ligten, to lift one from the saddle. To alight indicates the completion of the action thus de- scribed; to be brought by lifting down to the ground; to lift oneself down from the saddle, from out of the air.
Aliment.—Alimony. Lat. alimen- tum, alimonium, nourishment, victuals, from alo, I nourish, support.
Alkali. Arab. al-qali, the salt of ashes. —Diez. In modern chemistry general- ised to express all those salts that neutra- lise acids.
All. Goth. alls; ON. allr; AS. eall. Notwithstanding the double l, I have long been inclined to suspect that it is a derivative from the root á, æ, e, ei, aye, ever. Certainly the significations of ever and all are closely related, the one im- plying continuance in time, the other continuance throughout an extended series, or the parts of a multifarious object. The sense of the original á, how- ever, is not always confined to continu- ance in time, as is distinctly pointed out by Ihre. 'Urar-hornet war swa fagurt som æ gull sæi.'

The aurox horn was as fair as if it were all gold. So æ-lius, all- bright; æ-tid, modern Sw. all-tid, all time. AS. ælc, each, is probably æ-lic, ever-like, implying the application of a predicate to all the members of a series. In every, formerly evereche, everilk, for æfre-ælc, there is a repetition of the element signifying continuance. But every and all express fundamentally the same idea. Every one indicates all the individuals of a series; every man and all men are the same thing.
To Allay, formerly written allegge, as to say was formerly to segge. Two dis- tinct words are confounded in the modern allay, the first of which should properly be written with a single l, from AS. alec- gan, to lay down, to put down, suppress, tranquillise. Speaking of Wm. Rufus, the Sax. Chron. says, Eallan folce behet eallan tha unrihte to aleg- genne, the on his brother timan wæran; translated in R. of Gloucester, He behet God and that folc an beheste that was this, To alegge all luther lawes that yholde were be- fore And better make than were suththe he was ybore.
The joyous time now nigheth fast That shall alegge this bitter blast, And slake the winter sorrowe.
Shepherd's Calendar.
In the same way the Swed. has wädret lägger sig; wärken lägger sig, the wind is laid; the pain abates. So in Virgil, venti posuêre, the winds were laid.
If by your art, my dearest father, you have Put the wild waters in this roar, alay them.
Tempest.
So to allay thirst, grief, &c. The other form, confounded with alegge from alecgan in the modern allay, is the old allegge, from Fr. alléger, It. alleg- giare, Lat. alleviare, to lighten, mitigate, tranquillise, thus coming round so exactly to the sense of alay from alecgan, that it is impossible sometimes to say to which of the two origins the word should be re- ferred. Lat. levis, light, easy, gentle, becomes in Prov. leu; whence leviar, leujar, to assuage; alleviar, alleujar, OFr. alléger, to lighten, to assuage, precisely in the same way that from brevis, abbreviare, are formed Prov. breu, abreujar, Fr. ab- bréger, OE. abregge, to abridge. Que m'dones joi e m'leujes ma dolor. Quelle me donnât joie et m'allégeât ma dou- leur.—Rayn. Per Dieu aleujatz m'aquest fays ! For God's sake lighten me this burden.

It would have brought my life again, For certes evenly I dare well saine The sight only and the savour Aleggid much of my languor.—R. R.
In the original, Le voir sans plus, et l'oudeur Si m'alégeoient ma douleur.
So in Italian, Fate limosina et dir messi accio che s'alleggino nostri martiri.
—that our torments may be assuaged, or allayed.

To Alledge. Fr. Alleguer, to alledge, to produce reasons, evidence, or authority for the proof of.—Cotg.
Lat. legare, to intrust or assign unto; allegare, to depute or commission one, to send a message, to solicit by message. ' Petit a me Rabonius et amicos allegat.' Rabonius asks of me and sends friends (to support his petition). Hence it came to signify, to adduce reasons or witnesses in support of an argument. From the language of lawyers probably the word came into general use in England and France.
Thei woll a leggen also and by the godspell pre-oven it, Nolite judicare quenquam.—P. P.
Here we find alledge, from Lat. allegare, spelt and pronounced in the same manner as allegge (the modern allay), from AS. alecgan, and there is so little difference in meaning between laying down and bringing forward reasons, that the Latin and Saxon derivatives were sometimes confounded.
And eke this noble duke aleyde Full many another skill, and seide She had well deserved wrecke.—Gower in Rich.
Here aleyde is plainly to be understood in the sense of the Lat. allegare.

Allegory. Gr. ἀλληγορία, a figure of speech involving a sense different from the apparent one; ἄλλος, other, and ἀγορεύω, to speak.

Alley. Fr. allée, a walk, path, passage, from aller, to go.

Alligator. The American crocodile, from the Sp. lagarto, a lizard; Lat. lacerta. In Hawkins' voyage he speaks of these under the name of alagartoes. Lagarto das Indias, the cayman or South American alligator.—Neumann.

Allodial. Allodium, in Mid. Lat., was an estate held in absolute possession without a feudal superior.—Blackstone.
The derivation has been much disputed, and little light has been thrown upon it by the various guesses of antiquarians. The word appears as early as the ninth century under the forms alodis, alodus, alodium, alaudum, and in Fr. aleu, aleu franc, franc-aloud, franc-aloi, franc-aleuf. The general sense is that of an estate held in absolute possession. ' Meæ prædium possessionis hereditariæ, hoc est, alodum nostrum qui est in pago Andegavensi.'—Charta an. 839, in Duc. ' Alaudum meum sive hæreditatem quam dedit mihi pater meus in die nuptiarum mearum.' ' Paternæ hæreditati, quam nostrates alodium vel patrimonium vocant, sese contulit.' It is often opposed to a fief. ' Hæc autem fuerunt ea—quæ de allodiis sive prædiis in feudum commutavit Adela.' It is taken for an estate free of duties. ' Habemus vineæ agripenum unum allodialiter immunem, hoc est ab omni census et vicariæ redhibitione liberum.' ' Reddit ea terra 2 den. census cum ante semper alodium fuisset.' A.D. 1708.
It can hardly be wholly distinct from ON. odal, which is used in much the same sense, allodium, prædium hereditarium; ódals-jord, prædium hereditarium; ódal-borinn, natus ad heredium avitum, scilicet rectâ lineâ a primo occupante; ódals-madr, dominus allodialis, strictè primus occupans.—Haldorsen.
Dan. Sw. odel, a patrimonial estate. The landed proprietors of the Shetland Isles are still called udallers, according to Sir Walter Scott. The ON. ódal is also used in the sense of abandoned goods, at leggia fyrer ódal, to abandon a thing, to leave it to be taken by the first occupier. If Mid. Lat. alodis, alodum, is identical with the ON. word, it exhibits a singular transposition of syllables. Ihre would account for allodium from the compound ' alldha odhol,' mentioned in the Gothic laws,—an ancient inheritance, from alldr, ætas, antiquitas, and ódal, inheritance, as allda-vinr, an ancient friend, alder-hæfd, a possession of long standing. See Ihre in v. Od.

To Allow. Two words seem here confounded; 1. from Lat. laudare, to praise, and 2. from locare, to place, to let.
From the Lat. laus, laudis, was formed Prov. laus, lau, praise, approval, advice. Hence lauzar, alauzar, OFr. loer, louer, alouer, to praise, to approve, to recommend. In like manner the Lat. laudo was used for approbation and advice.
' Laudo igitur ut ab eo suam filiam primogenitam petatis duci nostro conjugem,'—I recommend. ' Et vos illuc tendere penitus dislaudamus,'—we dissuade you.—Ducange. ' Et leur demanda que il looient à faire, et li loerent tous que il descendist.' 'Et il li dirent que je li avois loé bon conseil.'—Joinville in Raynouard. In the same way in English : This is the sum of what I would have ye weigh, First whether ye allow my whole devise, And think it good for me, for them, for you, And if ye like it and allow it well— Ferrex and Porrex in Richardson.
Especially laus was applied to the approbation given by a feudal lord to the alienation of a fee depending upon him, and to the fine he received for permission to alienate. ' Hoc donum laudavit Adam Maringotus, de cujus feodo erat'—Duc.
From signifying consent to a grant, the word came to be applied to the grant itself. ' Comes concessit iis et laudavit terras et feuda eorum ad suam fidelitatem et servitium.' ' Facta est hæc laus sive concessio in claustro S. Marii.'—Duc.
Here we come very near the application of allowance to express an assignment of a certain amount of money or goods to a particular person or for a special purpose.
' And his allowance was a continual allowance given by the king, a daily rate for every day all his life.'—2 Kings.
In this sense, however, to allow is from the Lat. locare, to place, allocare, to appoint to a certain place or purpose ; It. allogare, to place, to fix ; Prov. alogar, Fr. louer, allouer, to assign, to put out to hire.
' Le seigneur peut saisir pour sa rente les bestes pasturantes sur son fonds encore qu'elles n'appartiennent à son vassal, ains à ceux qui ont allouées les distes bestes.'—Coutume de Normandie in Raynouard.
To allow in rekeninge—alloco. Allowance — allocacio. — Pr. Pm. Wall. alouwer, depenser.—Grandg.
Again, as the senses of Lat. laudare and allocare coalesced in Fr. allouer and E. allow, the confusion seems to have been carried back into the contemporary Latin, where allocare is used in the sense of approve or admit ; essonium allocabile, an admissible excuse.
Alloy. The proportion of base metal mixed with gold or silver in coinage. From Lat. lex, the law or rule by which the composition of the money is governed, It. lega, Fr. loi, aloi. ' Unusquisque denarius cudatur et fiat ad legem undecim denariorum.'—Duc. In the mining language of Spain the term is applied to the proportion of silver found in the ore. ' The extraction for the ALMS week was 750 cargos of clean ore, average ley from nine to ten marks per monton, with an increased proportion of gold.'—Times, Jan. 2, 1857.
From signifying the proportion of base metal in the coin, the term alloy was applied to the base metal itself.
Alluvial. Lat. alluo (ad and lavo, to wash), to wash against ; alluvies, mud brought down by the overflowing of a river ; alluvius (of land), produced by the mud of such overflowing.
To Ally. Fr. allier. Lat. ligare, to tie ; alligare, to tie to, to unite.
Almanack. The word seems originally to have been applied to a plan of the movements of the heavenly bodies. ' Sed hæ tabulæ vocantur Almanack vel Tallignum, in quibus sunt omnes motus cœlorum certificati à principio mundi usque in finem—ut homo posset inspicere omnia quæ in cœlo sunt omni die, sicut nos in calendario inspicimus omnia festa Sanctorum.'—Roger Bacon, Opus Tertium, p. 36.
In the Arab. of Syria al manâkh is climate or temperature.
Almond. Gr. ἀμυγδάλη, Lat. amygdala, Wallach. migddle, mandule ; Sp. almendra, Prov. amandola, Fr. amande. It. mandola, mandorla, Langued. amenlou, amello.
Alms. — Almonry. — Aumry. Gr. ἐλεημοσύνη, properly compassionateness, then relief given to the poor. This, being an ecclesiastical expression, passed direct into the Teutonic languages under the form of G. almosen, AS. ælmesse, ælmes, OE. almesse, almose, Sc. awmous, alms ; and into the Romance under the form of Prov. almosna, Fr. aumône, anmône. Hence the Fr. aumônier, E. almoner, awmnere, an officer whose duty it is to dispense alms, and almonry, aumry, the place where the alms are given, from the last of which again it seems that the old form awmbrere, an almoner, must have been derived.—Pr. Pm. When aumry is used with reference to the distribution of alms, doubtless two distinct words are confounded, almonry and ammary or ambry, from Fr. armoire, Lat. armaria, almaria, a cupboard. This latter word in English was specially applied to a cupboard for keeping cold and broken victuals.—Bailey, in v. Ambre, Ammery, Aumry. Ambry, a pantry.—Hal. Then as an aumry or receptacle for broken victuals would occupy an important place in the office where the daily dole of charity was dispensed, the association seems to have led to the use of aumry or ambry, as if it were a contraction of almonry, from which, as far as sound is concerned, it might very well have arisen. And vice versa, almonry was sometimes used in the sense of armarium, almarium, a cupboard. Almonarium, almorietum, almeriola, a cupboard or safe to shut up broken victuals to be distributed as alms to the poor.—B. See Ambry.

Aloft. On loft, up in the air. G. luft, ON. lopt, loft, OE. lyft, the air, the sky. N. aa loft, aloft, on high.

Along. AS. andlang, G. entlang, entlangs, langs. It. lungo, Fr. le long de, through the length of. AS. andlangne dæg, throughout the length of the day. The term is also used figuratively to express dependence, accordance.
I cannot tell whereon it was alonge.
Some said it was long on the fire making, Some said it was long on the blowing.
Canon Yeoman's Tale.
This mode of expression is very general.
Trop fesoient miex cortoisie A toute gent lonc ce que erent.
Fab. et Contes, i, 160.
They did better courtesy to each according to what they were, according to their condition.
Hence selonc, selon, according to, the initial element of which is the particle si, se, ce, so, here, this.
In the same way Pol. wedlug, according to, from w, we, indicating relation of place, and dlugo, long.
The AS. form was gelang. * Et the is ure lyf gelang, our life is along of thee, is dependent on thee. ' Hii sohton on hwom that gelang wære.' They inquired along of whom that happened—Lye. Walach. langa, juxta, secundum, penes, pone, propter.

Aloof. To loof or luff in nautical language is to turn the vessel up into the wind. Aloof, then, is to the windward of one, and as a vessel to the windward has it in her choice either to sail away or to bear down upon the leeward vessel, aloof has come to signify out of danger, in safety from, out of reach of.
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded; But with a crafty madness keeps aloof, When we would bring him on to some confession Of his true state.—Hamlet.

Alpine. Of the nature of things found in lofty mountains; from the Alps, the highest mountains in Europe. Gael. Alp, a height, an eminence, a mountain.

Altar. The fire-place on which sacrifices were made to the gods. Lat. altare, which Ihre would explain from ON. eldr, fire, and ar, or arn, a hearth; or perhaps AS. ern, æm, a place; as Lat. lucerna, laterna, a lantern, from luc-ern, leohtern, the place of a light.

To Alter. To make something other than what it is; Lat. alterare, from alter, the other. So G. ändern, to change, from ander, the other; and the Lat. muto finds an origin of like nature in Esthon. mu, another, whence muuduma, muudma, to change.

Always. AS. eallne wæg, ealle wæga, the whole way, altogether, throughout. The Servians use put, way, for the number of times a thing happens; jedan put, once; dva put, twice, &c. Dan. een-gang, one going, once; tre-gange, three times. So from Du. reyse, a journey, een, twee, dry, reysen, semel, bis, ter.—Kil.

Am-, Amb-. Gr. ἀμφί, about, around, properly on both sides; ἄμφω, ambo, both.

Amalgam. A pasty mixture of mercury and other metal, from Gr. μάλαγμα, an emollient, probably a poultice, and that from μαλάσσω, to soften.—Diez.

Amanuensis. Lat. from the habit of the scribe or secretary signing the documents he wrote (as we see in St Paul's Epistles) 'A manu,' from the hand of so and so. Hence a manu servus was a slave employed as secretary.

To Amate. To confound, stupefy, quell.
Upon the walls the Pagans old and young Stood hushed and still, amased and amazed.
Fairfax in Boucher.
OFr. amater, mater, mattir, to abate, mortify, make fade, from mat, G. matt, dull, spiritless, faint. It. matto, mad, foolish; Sp. matar, to quench, to slay.
But when I came out of swooning And had my wit and my feeling, I was all mate and wende full wele Of blode to have lost a full grete dele.
In the original—Je fus moult mâté.
Derived by Diez from the expression check-mate, at chess.

Amative, Amity. From Lat. amo, to love, are amor, Fr. amour, love; amatus, loved; amabilis; amicus, a loving one, a friend; and from each of these numerous secondary derivatives; amorous, amative, amateur, amiable, amicable. Lat. amicitia, Fr. amitié, E. amity, &c.

To Amay. It. smagare, to discourage, dispirit; Sp. desmayar, to discourage, despond; desmayar se, to faint; OPort.

amago, fright; Prov. esmagar, esmaiar, to trouble, to frighten, to grieve; Fr. s'esmaier, to be sad, pensive, astonied, careful, to take thought.—Cotgr. Esmay, thought, care, cark. Hence E. amay, dismay, or simply may. Beryn was at counsell, his heart was full woo, And his menye (attendants) sory, distrakt, and all amayide.—Chaucer, Beryn, 2645. So for ought that Beryn coud ethir spake or pray He myght in no wyse pass, full sore he gan to may.—Ibid. 1685. The Romance forms are, according to Diez, derived from the Goth, magan, to have power, to be strong, with the negative particle dis. Compare Dan. afmagt, a swoon.

Ambassador. Goth. Andbahts, a servant, andbahti, service, ministry; OHG. ambaht, a minister or ministry; ampah-tan, to minister; G. ampt, employment, office. In Middle Lat. ambascia, ambaxia, or ambactia, was used for business, and particularly applied to the business of another person, or message committed to another, and hence the modern sense of embassy, It. ambasciata, as the message sent by a ruling power to the government of another state; ambassador, the person who carries such a message. Castrais, embessa, to employ. ' Quicunque asinum alienum extra domini voluntatem praesumpserit, aut per unum diem aut per duos in ambascia sua'—in his own business.—Lex Burgund. in Duc. ' Si in dominica ambascia fuerit occupatus.'—Lex Sal. In another edition, ' Si in jussione Regis fuerit occupatus.' Ambasciari, to convey a message. ' Et ambasciari ex illorum parte quod mihi jussum fuerat.'—Hincmar. in Duc. The word ambactus is said by Festus to be Gallic : ' ambactus apud Ennium linguâ Gallicâ servus appellatur ;' and Caesar, speaking of the equites in Gaul, says, ' circum se ambactos, clientesque habent.' Hence Grimm explains the word from bah, as backers, supporters, persons standing at one's back, as henchman, a person standing at one's haunch or side. The notion of manual labour is preserved in Du. ambagt, a handicraft; ambagts-mann, an artisan. ON. ambatt, a female slave. It. ambasciare (perhaps originally to oppress with work), to trouble, to grieve ; ambascia, anguish, distress, shortness of breath.

Amber, Ambergris. MHG. amber, Fr. ambre, Sp. Ptg. ambar, alam-bar, alambre. The Ar. anbar seems to have signified in the first instance ambergris or grey amber, an odoriferous excretion of certain fish, cast up by the waves, like the yellow amber, on the shore. Hence the name was transferred to the latter substance.
Ambient.—Ambition. Lat. ambio, to go round, to environ ; also to go about hunting for favour or collecting votes, whence ambitio, a soliciting of or eager desire for posts of honour, &c.
Amble. Fr. ambler, Sp. amblar. It. ambiare, from Lat. ambulo, to walk, go a foot's pace.
Ambry, Aumbry, Aumber. A sideboard or cupboard-top on which plate was displayed—Skinner; in whose time the word was becoming obsolete. Fr. armoire, a cupboard. Sp. armaria, almario, G. almer, a cupboard. Mid. Lat. armaria, almaria, a chest or cupboard, especially for keeping books, whence armarius, the monk in charge of the books of a monastery. ' Purpuram optimam de almariâ tollens' 'thesaurum et almarium cum ejus pertinentiis, vide-licet libris ecclesiæ.'—Duc. 'Biblio-theca, sive armarium vel archivum, boc-hord.'—Gloss. Ælfr. The word was very variously written in English. 'Almoriolum—an almery,'—Pictorial Vocab. in National Antiquities. And as the term was often applied to a cupboard used for keeping broken meat, of which alms would mainly consist, it seems to have contracted a fallacious reference to the word alms, and thus to become confounded with almonry, the office where alms were distributed. The original meaning, according to Diez, is a chest in which arms were kept, ' armarium, repositorium armorum.'—Gloss. Lindenbr.

Ambush. From It. bosco, Prov. bosc, a bush, wood, thicket : It. imboscarsi, Prov. emboscar, Fr. embuscher, to go into a wood, get into a thicket for shelter, then to lie in wait, set an ambush.
Amenable. Easy to be led or ruled, from Fr. amener, to bring or lead unto, mener, to lead, to conduct. See Demean.
Amercement. — Amerciament. A pecuniary penalty imposed upon offenders at the mercy of the court : it differs from a fine, which is a punishment certain, and determined by some statute.—B. In Law Latin, poni in misericordiâ was thus to be placed at the mercy of the court; être mis à merci, or être amerto be amerced, and misericordia was used for any arbitrary exaction.
Concedimus etiam eisdem abbati et monachis et eorum successoribus quod sint quieti de omnibus misericordiis in perpetuum.—Charter Edw. I. in Duc. Et inde coram eo placitabuntur, et de omnibus misericordiis et emendationibus debemus habere ii solidos.—Duc.
When a party was thus placed at the mercy of the court, it was the business of affeerors appointed for that purpose to fix the amount of the amercement. See Affeer.
Amnesty. Gr. ἀμνηστία (a priv. & μνάομαι, I remember), a banishing from remembrance of former misdeeds.
Amount. From mont, hill, and val, valley, the French formed amont and aval, upwards and downwards respectively, whence monter, to mount, to rise up, and avaler, to send down, to swallow. Hence amount is the sum total to which a number of charges rise up when added together.
Ample. Lat. amplus, large, spacious.
Amputate. Lat. amputo, to cut off, to prune; puto, to cleanse, and thence to cut off useless branches, to prune; putus, pure, clean, bright.
Amulet. Lat. amuletum, a ball or anything worn about the person as a preservative or charm against evil. From Arab. hamala, to carry.
To Amuse. To give one something to muse on, to occupy the thoughts, to entertain, give cheerful occupation.
Formerly also used as the simple muse, to contemplate, earnestly fix the thoughts on. Here I put my pen into the inkhorn and fell into a strong and deep amusement, revolving in my mind with great perplexity the amazing change of our affairs.—Fleetwood in Richardson.
An. The indefinite article, the purport of which is simply to indicate individuality. It is the same word with the numeral one, AS. an, and the difference in pronunciation has arisen from a lighter accent being laid upon the word when used as an article than when as a definite numeral. So in Breton, the indefinite article has become eun, while the numeral is unan. Dan. een, one, en, a, an.
An.—And. There is no radical distinction between an and and, which are accidental modifications of spelling ultimately appropriated to special applications of the particle.
In our older writers it was not unfrequent to make use of an in the sense in which we now employ and, and vice versâ and in the sense of an or if.
First, an for and.
He sone come bysyde hys fone echon, An bylevede hym there al nyght, and al hys ost also, An thogte anon amorwe strong batayle do.
Secondly, and for if or an.
Me reweth sore I am unto hire teyde, For and I should rekene every vice Which that she hath, ywis I were to nice.
Squire's Prologue.
And I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee simple of my life for an hour and a half.
We find an (if and and if, or simply an for if —I pray thee, Launce, and if thou seest my boy bid him make haste.
But and if that wicked servant say in his heart, &c.
Nay, an thou dalliest, then I am thy foe.
Ben Jonson in R.
In the same sense the OSwed. æn, while om, æn corresponds exactly to our an if, om, formerly of, being the exact representative of E. if. The Sw. æn is also used in the sense of and, still, yet.—Ihre.
It is extremely difficult to guess at the sensible image which lies at the root of the obscure significations expressed by the particles and conjunctions, the most time-worn relics of language; but in the present instance it seems that both sense and form might well be taken from the E. even, in the sense of continuous, unbroken, level.
The poetical contraction of even into e'en shows how such a root might give rise to such forms as ON. enn, OSwed. æn, Dan. end. With respect to meaning, we still use even as a conjunction in cases closely corresponding to the Swed. æn, and Dan. end. Thus we have Swed. æn-nu, translated by Ihre, etiamnum, even now, i. e. without a sensible break between the event in question and now; ændock, quamvis, even though, or although; æn, yet, still, continuously; 'he is still there,' he continues there. So in Danish,—om dette end skulde ske, even if that should happen; end ikke, ne quidem, not even then; end nu, even now. When one proposition is made conditional on another, the two are practically put upon the same level, and thus the conditionality may fairly be expressed by even contracted into æn or an. Analysing in this point of view the sentence above quoted, Nay, an thou dalliest, then I am thy foe, it must be interpreted. Nay, understand these propositions as equally certain, thou dalliest here, I am thy foe.—It depends upon you whether the first is to prove a fact or no, but the second proposition has the same value which you choose to give to the former. It will subsequently be shown probable that the conjunction if is another relic of the same word. On the other hand, placing two things side by side, or on a level with each other, may be used to express that they are to be taken together, to be treated in the same manner, to form a single whole ; and thus it is that the same word, which implies conditionality when circumstances show the uncertainty of the first clause, may become a copulative when the circumstances of the sentence indicate such a signification.
Ana.— Gr. ἀνά, up, on, back.
Anatomy. Gr. ἀνατέμνω, to cut up. See Atom.
Ancestor. Fr. ancestre, ancêtre, from Lat. antecessor, one that goes before. See Cede.
Anchor. Lat. anchora, Gr. ἀγκυρα. There can be no doubt that it is from the root signifying hook, which gives rise to the Gr. ἀγκυλος, curved, crooked ; ἀγκων, an elbow, recess, corner ; ὄγκη, ὄγκινος, a hook ; Lat. angulus, an angle, uncus, a hook, crooked.
Unco alliget anchora morsu.—Virg.
Anchoret. A hermit. Gr. ἀναχωρητης, one who has retired from the world ; from ἀναχωρέω, to retire.
Anchovy. Fr. anchois. It. ancioe, Gr. ἀφύη, Lat. apua, aphya (apya) ; whence might arise. It. (apj-uga) acciuga, Pied. Sicil. anciova, Genoes. anciua.—Diez.
Ancient. Lat. ante, Prov. antes, It. anzi, before, whence anziano, Fr. ancien, ancient, belonging to former times.
Ancle. AS. ancleow, G. enkel. Probably a parallel formation with Gr. ἀγκυλη, a loop, the bend of the arm; and from the same root, ἀγκων, the elbow, or bending of the arm ; It. anca, the haunch, or bending of the hip ; OHG. ancha, Bav. anke (genick), the bending of the neck.
And. See An.
Andiron. Originally the iron bars which supported the two ends of the logs on a wood fire. AS. brand-isen, brand-iron, could never have been corrupted into andiron. The Mid. Lat. has andena, andela, andeda, anderia. Fr. landier, grand chenet de cuisine.—Dict. Wallon. The Flemish wend-ijser probably exhibits the true origin, from wenden, to turn ; wend-ijser, brand-ijser, crateuterium, ferrum in quo veru vertitur,—Kil., i. e. the rack in front of the kitchen-dogs in which the spit turns. ' Lander, Gall. landier, Lat. verutentum; item hæc andena.'—Catholicon Arm. in Duc. Andena seems a mere latinisation of OE. aundyre for andiron, as brondyr for brondiron, gredyre for gridiron. 'Andena, aundyre.' ' Trepos, brandyr.' ' Craticula, gredyre.' —National Antiq. 178. In modern English the term has been transferred to the moveable fire-irons.
To Aneal, Anele. To give the last unction. I aneele a sick man, J'enhuille.—Palsgr. Fr. huille, oil.
Anecdote. Gr. ἀνεκδοτος, not published, from ἐκδιδωμι, to give out, to put forth.
Anent.—Anenst. In face of, respecting. AS. ongean, opposite ; foran ongean, foran g'en (Thorpe's Dipl. p. 341), over against, opposite, in front, Sc. fore-anent. The word anent, however, does not seem to come directly from the AS. ongean. It shows at least a northern influence from the ON. giegnt, Sw. gent, opposite, gent öfwer, over against. Hence on gent, anent, and with the s, so commonly added to prepositions (comp. ante, before, Prov. antes, AS. togeanes, &c.), anentis. ' Anentis men, it is impossible, but not anentis God.'—Wicliff. Hence Anenst, as alongst from along, whilst from while, against from again.
Angel. Lat. angelus, from Gr. Ἄγγελος, a messenger, one sent ; ἀγγελλω, to send tidings.
Anger. Formerly used in the sense of trouble, torment, grievance.
He that ay has levyt fre May not know well the propyrté, The angyr na the wrechyt dome That is cowplyt to foule thyrldome.
Bruce, i. 235.
Shame— From whom fele angirs I have had.—R. R.
In the original, Par qui je fus puis moult grévé.
From the sense of oppression, or injury, the expression was transferred to the feelings of resentment naturally aroused in the mind of the person aggrieved. In the same way, the word harm signifies injury, damage, in English, and resentment, anger, vexation, in Swedish. The idea of injury is very often expressed by the image of pressure, as in the word oppress, or the Fr. grever, to bear heavy on one. Now the root ang is very widely spread in the sense of compression, tightness. G. eng, compressed, strait, narrow; Lat. angere, to strain, strangle, vex, torment; angustus, narrow; angina, oppression of the breast; angor, anguish, sorrow, vexation; Gr. ἄγχω, to compress, strain, strangle, whence ἄγχι (as It. presso), near; ἀγχέομαι, to be grieved; ἀγχόνη, what causes pain or grief.

Both physical and metaphorical senses are well developed in the ON. angr, narrow, a nook or corner, grief, pain, sorrow; angra, to torment, to trouble; krabba-angar, crabs' pincers.

To Angle. To fish with a rod and line, from AS. angel, a fish-hook. Du. anghel-snoer, anghel-roede, a fishing-line, fishing-rod; anghelen, to angle. Chaucer has angle-hook, showing that the proper meaning of the word angle was then lost, and by a further confusion it was subsequently applied to the rod.

A fisher next his trembling angle bears.—Pope.

Anguish. Lat. angustia, a strait, whence It. angoscia (as poscia, from postea), Fr. angoisse, E. anguish. See Anger.

Anile. Lat. anilis, from anus, an aged woman.

Animal.—Animate. Lat. animus, the spirit, living principle, mind, properly the breath, as the ruling function of life in man, analogous to spirit, from spiro, to breathe. Gr. ἄνεμος, wind; ἄω, ἄημι, to blow.

To Anneal. To fire glass in order to melt and fix the vitreous colours with which it is painted.

And like a picture shone in glass annealed.—Dryden in Worcester.

I aneel a potte of erthe or suche like with a coloure, Je plomme.—Palsgr. Also to temper glass or metals in a gradually decreasing heat. It. focare, to fire or set on fire, also to neal metals.—Fl.

From AS. ælan, onælan, to set on fire, burn, bake. The expression cocti lateris of the Vulgate, Is. xvi. 7, 11, is rendered anelid tyil in the earlier Wickliffite version, and bakun tijl in the later.—Marsh.

* To Annoy. It. annoiare, OFr. anoier, anueir, anuier, Fr. ennuyer, to annoy, vex, trouble, grieve, afflict, weary, irke, importune overmuch.—Cot. The origin of the word has been well explained by Diez from the Lat. phrase esse in odio, It. esser in odio, to be hateful or repugnant to one. Esse alieni in odio; apud aliquem in odio esse.—Cic. Hence was formed Sp. enojo, offence, injury, anger; enojar, to molest, trouble, vex; It. noia, trouble, weariness, vexation, disquiet; recarsi a noja, to be tired of something; nojare, venire a noja, to weary, to be tedious to. Diez cites OVenet. plu te sont a inodio as exactly equivalent to It. piu ti sono a noja. 'Recarsi a noia, e aversi a noia,' says Vanzoni, 'vagliono recarsi in fastidio, in recrescimento, in odio, odiare, odium in aliquem concipere.' So in Languedoc, odi, hate, disgust; aver en odi, to hate; la car me ven en odi, meat is distasteful to me; me venes en odi, vous m'ennuyez, you are tedious to me. From in odio arose OFr. enuy, envi (commonly referred to Lat. invitus), à envi or à envis, unwillingly, with regret, as hui from hodie. And from enuy was formed ennuyer, to weary, to annoy.

From the same source must be explained Du. noode, noeye, unwilling, with regret or displeasure; noode iet doen, gravatè aliquid facere; noode hebben, ægri ferre; noeyen, noyen, officere, nocere, molestum esse.—Kil. 'Noode, nooyelick, k ennuy, k regret, invitus, coactus, ingratus, vel ægrè, molestè; jet noode doen, faire quelque chose enuy; noode jet horen, ouyr enuy quelque chose, graviter audire.'—Thesaurus Theut. Ling. 1573.

Anodyne. Gr. ἀνώδυνος (a priv. and ὀδύνη, pain), without sense of pain, capable of dispelling pain.

Anomalous. Gr. ἀνώμαλος (a priv. and ὁμαλός, level, fair), irregular, deviating from an even surface.

Anon. AS. on an, in one, jugiter, continuo, sine intermissione—Lye; at one time, in a moment; ever and anon, continually.

Answer. AS. andswarian, from and, in opposition, and swerian, Goth. svaran, to swear. ON. svara, to answer, to engage for. It is remarkable that the Latin expression for answer is formed in exactly the same way from a verb spondere, signifying to engage for, to assure. The simpler idea of speaking in return is directly expressed by Goth. anda-vaurd, G. ant-wort, AS. andwyrd, current side by side with the synonymous andswar.

Ant. The well-known insect, contracted from emmet; like aunt, a parent's sister, from Lat. amita.

Ante- Lat. ante, before.

Ant- Anti- Gr. ἀντί, against. What is in face of one or before one is in one point of view opposite or against one.

Anthem. A divine song sung by two opposite choirs or choruses.—B. Lat.

antiphona; Gr. ἀντίφωνα, from ἀντιφωνέω, to sound in answer. Prov. antifena; AS. antefn, whence anthem, as from AS. stefn, E. stem. The Fr. form antienne shows a similar corruption to that of Estienne, from Stephanus.
Antick. — Antique. Lat. anticus, from ante, before, as posticus, from post, behind.
At the revival of art in the 14th and 15th centuries the recognised models of imitation were chiefly the remains of ancient sculpture, left as the legacy of Roman civilisation. Hence the application of the term antique to work of sculptured ornamentation, while individual figures wrought in imitation or supposed imitation of the ancient models, were called antiques, as the originals are at the present day.
At the entering of the palace before the gate was builded a fountain of embowed work en- grayled with anticke workes,—the old God of wine called Bacchus birling the wine, which by the conduits in the earth ran to the people plenteously with red, white, and claret wine.— Hall's Chron.
Again from the same author: At the nether end were two broad arches upon three antike pillers, all of gold, burnished, swaged, and graven full of gargills and serpentes—and above the arches were made sundry antikes and devices.
But as it is easier to produce a certain effect by monstrous and caricature representations than by aiming at the beautiful in art, the sculptures by which our medieval buildings were adorned, executed by such stone-masons as were to be had, were chiefly of the former class, and an antick came to signify a grotesque figure such as we see on the spouts or pinnacles of our cathedrals.
Some fetch the origin of this proverb (he looks as the devil over Lincoln) from a stone picture of the Devil which doth or lately did overlook Lincoln College. Surely the architect intended it no further than for an ordinary anticke.—Fuller in R.
Now for the inside here grows another doubt, whether grotesca, as the Italians, or antique work, as we call it, should be received.—Reliquiæ Wottonianæ in R.
The term was next transferred to the grotesque characters, such as savages, fauns, and devils, which were favourite subjects of imitation in masques and revels.
That roome with pure gold it all was overlaid Wrought with wild antickes which their follies play'd In the riche metal as they living were.—Spencer.

APHORISM To dance the anticks is explained by Bailey to dance after an odd and ridiculous manner, or in a ridiculous dress, like a jack-pudding. To go antiquely, in Shakespeare, to go in strange disguises.
In modern language antic is applied to extravagant gestures, such as those adopted by persons representing the characters called antics in ancient masques. Mannequin, a puppet or an antic.—Cot.
Antidote. Gr. ἀντίδοτον, something given against, a preventative; δότος, what is to be given.
Antler. Fr. andouillers, the branches of a stag's horns; but properly andouiller is the first branch or brow-antler, surandouiller the second. As the brow-antler projects forward the word has been derived from ante, before, but the explanation has not been satisfactorily made out.
Anvil. Formerly written anvild or anvild; AS. anfilt Pl.D. ambolt; Du. aenbild, ambeld, a block to hammer on. Percutere, villan.—Gloss. Pezron; fillist, verberas.—Otfried. So Lat. incus, incudis, from in and cudere, to strike; G. amboss; OHG. anapoz, from an and bossen, to strike.
Anxious. Lat. anxius, from ango, anxi, to strain, press, strangle, choke, vex, trouble.
Any. AS. ænig, from an, one, and ig, a termination equivalent to Goth. eigs, from eigan, to have. Thus from gabe, a gift, wealth, gabeigs, one having wealth, rich. In like manner, any is that which partakes of the nature of one, a small quantity, a few, some one, one at the least.
Apanage. Lat. panis, bread, whence Prov. panar, apatiar, to nourish, to support; Fr. apanage, a provision for a younger child.
Apart. — Apartment. Fr. à part, aside, separate. Apartment, something set aside, a suite of rooms set aside for a separate purpose, finally applied to a single chamber.
Ape. Originally a monkey in general; latterly applied to the tailless species. To ape, to imitate gestures, from the imitative habits of monkeys. But is it not possible that the name of the ape may be from imitating or taking off the actions of another? Goth., ON. af, G. ab, of, from.
Aperient.—Aperture. Lat. aperio, apertum, to open, to display; pario, to bring forth. See Cover.
Aphorism. Gr. ἀφορισμός, a definite sentence; ἀφορίζω, to mark off, to define; ὅρος, a bound, landmark.
Apo- Gr. ἀπό, corresp. to Lat. ab, of, off, from, away.
Apoplexy. From Gr. ἀποπλήσσω, to strike down, to disable; —ομαι, to lose one's senses, become dizzy; πλήσσω, ξω, to strike.
Apostle. — Epistle. Gr. ἀπόστολος, one sent out, from ἀποστέλλω, to send off, despatch on some service. In the same way from ἐπιστέλλω, to send to, to announce, ἐπιστολή, an epistle or letter.
Apothecary. Gr. ἀποθήκη, a store or keeping-place; ἀποτίθημι, to store or put away.
Appal. Wholly unconnected with pale, to which it is often referred. To cause to pall (see Pall), to deaden, to take away or lose the vital powers, whether through age or sudden terror, horror, or the like. An old appalled wight, in Chaucer, is a man who has lost his vigour through age.
And among other of his famous deeds, he revived and quickened again the faith of Christ, that in some places of his kingdom was sore appalled.—Fabian in R.
Apparel. From Lat. par, equal, like, the MLat. diminutive pariculus, gave rise to It. parecchio, Sp. parejo, Fr. pareil, like. Hence It. apparecchiare, Sp. aparejar, Prov. aparellhar, Fr. appareiller, properly to join like to like, to fit, to suit. Appareil, outfit, preparation, habiliments. —Diez.
And whanne sum men seiden of the Temple that it was aparelid with good stones.—Wiclif in R. Eke if he apparaille his mete more deliciously than nede is.—Parson's Tale.
Then like Fr. habiller, or E. dress, the word was specially applied to clothing, as the necessary preparation for every kind of action.
To Appeal. Lat. appellare, Fr. appeler, to call, to call on one for a special purpose, to call for judgment, to call on one for his defence, i. e. to accuse him of a crime.
To Appear.—Apparent. OFr. apparoir; Lat. pareo, to be open to view.
Appease. Fr. appaiser, from paix, peace.
Apple. AS. æpl, ON. apal, W. apal, Ir. avall, Lith. obolys, Russ. jabloko.
To Appoint. The Fr. point was used in the sense of condition, manner, arrangement—the order, trim, array, plight, case, taking, one is in.—Cotgr. En piteux poind, in piteous case; habiller en ce poind, to dress in this fashion.—Cent Nouv. Nouv. A poind, aptly, in good time, in good season; prendre son à poinct, to take his fittest opportunity for; quand il fust à poinct, when the proper time came. Hence appoind, fitness, opportunity, a thing for one's purpose, after his mind; and appointer (to find fitting, pronounce fitting), to determine, order, decree, to finish a controversy, to accord, agree, make a composition between parties, to assign or grant over unto.—Cotgr.
To Appraise. Lat. pretium, Fr. prix, a price, value; apprécier, to rate, esteem, prize, set a price on.—Cotgr. I prise ware, I sette a pryce of a thynge what it is worthe: je apprise.—Palsgr. The Pl. D. laven is used both as E. praise, to commend, and also as appraise, to set a price on. To praise, in fact, is only to exalt the price or value of a thing, to speak in commendation.
Apprehend.—Apprentice.—Apprise. Lat. prehendere, to catch hold of; apprehendere, to seize, and metaphorically to take the meaning, to understand, to learn. Fr. apprendre, appris, to learn, whence the E. apprise, to make a thing known. Fr. apprentis, a learner, one taken for the purpose of learning a trade.
Approach. From Lat. prope (comp. propius), near, were formed appropiare (cited by Diez from a late author). Walach. apropiá, Prov. apropchar. It. approcciare, Fr. approcher, to come near, to approach.
Approbation. — Approve. — Approver. Lat. probus, good, probare, approbare, to deem good, pronounce good. Fr. approver, to approve, allow, find good, consent unto.—Cotgr.
Hence an Approver in law is one who has been privy and consenting to a crime, but receives pardon in consideration of his giving evidence against his principal.
This false thefe this sompnour, quoth the frere, Had alway bandis redy to his hond, That tellith him all the secre they knew. For their acquaintance was not come of new; They werin his approvirs privily.—Friar's Tale.
Appurtenance. Fr. appartenir, to pertain or belong to.
* Apricot. Formerly apricock, agreeing with Lat. præcoqua or præcocia. Mod. Gr. πραικοκκιον. They were considered by the Romans a kind of peach, and were supposed to take their name from their ripening earlier than the ordinary peach.
Maturescunt æstate præcocia intra triginta annos reperta et primo denariis singulis venundata.—Pliny, N. H. xv. 11.

It may be doubted, however, whether the Lat. præcoqua was not an adaptation. It is certain that the apricot was introduced from Armenia, and the fruit is still called barkûk in Persian. It is far more likely that the name should have been imported with the fruit into Italy than that the Persians should have adopted the Latin name of a native fruit.—Marsh.

Apron. A cloth worn in front for the protection of the clothes, by corruption for napron.
—And therewith to wepe She made, and with her napron feir and white ywash She wyped soft her eyen for teris that she outlash. Chaucer, Beryn. Prol. 31.
Still called nappern [pronounced nap-pron in Cleveland. J. C. A.] in the N. of E.—Hall. Naprun, or barm-cloth.—Pr. Pm. From OFr. naperon, properly the augmentative of nape, a cloth, as napkin is the diminutive. Naperon, grande nappe.—Roquefort. Naperon is explained by Hécart, a small cloth put upon the table-cloth during dinner, to preserve it from stains, and taken away before dessert, a purpose precisely analogous to that for which an apron is used. 'Un beau service de damassé de Silésie ; la nappe, le naperon et 24 serviettes.'—About. Madelon. The loss or addition of an initial n to words is very common, and frequently we are unable to say whether the consonant has been lost or added. Thus we have nauger and auger, newt and ewte, or eft, nawl and awl, nompire and umpire, and the same phenomenon is common in other European languages.

Apt. Lat. aptus, fastened close, connected, and thence fit, suitable, proper.

Aqueous.—Aquatic. Lat. aqua, San-scr. ap, Gr. âa, Alban. ughë, water; Goth. ahva, OHG. aha, a river.

Arable. Lat. aro, OE. ear, to plough.

Arbiter.—Arbitrate. The primary sense of Lat. arbiter is commonly given as an eye-witness, from whence that of an umpire or judge is supposed to be derived, as a witness specially called in for the purpose of determining the question under trial. But there is no recognised derivation in Latin which would account for either of these significations. A rational explanation may, however, be found in Fin.
There is a common tendency in an uninformed state of society to seek for the resolution of doubtful questions of sufficient interest by the casting of lots in some shape or other. Thus in Latin sors, a lot, is taken in the sense of an oracle, and sortilegus is a soothsayer, one who gives oracles, or answers questions by the casting of lots ; and this doubtless is the origin of E. sorcerer, sorcery. Albanian, short, a lot, shortár, a soothsayer. Now one of the points upon which the cunning man of the present day is most frequently consulted is the finding of lost property, and a dispute upon such a subject among a barbarous people would naturally be referred to one who was supposed to have supernatural means of knowing the truth. Thus the lots-man or soothsayer would naturally be called in as arbiter or dooms-man. Now we find in Fin. arpa, a lot, symbol, divining rod, or any instrument of divination ; arpa-mies, (mies=man,) sortium ductor, arbiter, hariolus ; arpelen, arwella, to decide by lot, to divine ; ar-wata, conjicio, auguror, æstimo, arbitror ; arwaaja, arbiter in re censendâ. ; arwelo, arbitrium, opinio, conjectura ; arwaus, conjectura, æstimatio arbitraria. It will be observed in how large a proportion of these cases the Lat. arbiter and its derivatives are used in explanation of the Fin. words derived from arpa.

Arbour. From OE. herbere, originally signifying a place for the cultivation of herbs, a pleasure-ground, garden, subsequently applied to the bower or rustic shelter which commonly occupied the most conspicuous situation in the garden ; and thus the etymological reference to herbs being no longer apparent, the spelling was probably accommodated to the notion of being sheltered by trees or shrubs (arbor).
This path I folowid till it me brought To a right plesaunt herber wel ywrought. Which that benched was, and with turfis new Freshly turned— The hegge also that yeden in compas And closid in all the grene herbere, With Sycamore was set and Eglatere,— And shapin was this herber, rofe and all, As is a pretty parlour. Chaucer, Flower and Leaf.
It growyth in a gardyn, quod he, 'That God made hymselve, Amyddes mannes body, The more (root) is of that stokke, Herte highte the herber That it inne groweth.—P. P. 2. 331.
The word is still used in its ancient meaning at Shrewsbury, where the different guilds have separate little pleasure-gardens with their summer-houses each within its own fence, in the midst of an open field outside the town, and over the gate of one of these gardens is written 'Shoemakers' Arbour.' This lady walked outright till he might see her enter into a fine close arbor: it was of trees whose branches so interlaced each other that it could resist the strongest violence of eye-sight.—Arcadia in R.

Arch. A curved line, part of a circle, anything of a bowed form, as the arch of a bridge. Lat. arcus, a bow, which has been referred to W. gwyrek, curved, W. gwyro, to bend.

* Arch, Arrant. 1. Arch and its equivalents in the other branches of Teutonic are used with great latitude of meaning. In E. it signifies roguish, mischievous, sly, and must be identified with Dan. arrig, ill-tempered, troublesome, G. arg, bad of its kind, morally bad, mischievous, wanton, Du. erg, sly, malicious. G. ein arger knabe, Du. een erg kind, an arch boy, un malin enfant, un petit rusé. The earliest meaning that we can trace is that of ON. argr, AS. earg, earh, faint-hearted, sluggish, timid, and in that sense among the Lombards it was the most offensive term of abuse that could be employed. ' Memento Dux Ferdulfe quod me esse inertem et inutilem dixeris, et vulgari verbo, arga, vocaveris.'—Paul Warnefrid. ' Si quis alium argam per furorem clamaverit.'—Lex. Langobard. in Duc. Then from the contempt felt for anything like timidity in those rough and warlike times the word acquired the sense of worthless, bad, exaggerated in degree when applied to a bad quality. ON. argvitugr, taxed with cowardice, contemptible, bad. Dan. det arrigste snavs, the most arrant trash, wretched stuff. OE. arwe, fainthearted.

Now thou seist he is the beste knygt, And thou as arwe coward.
Alisaunder, 3340.

There can be no doubt that E. arrant is essentially the same word, the termination of which is probably from the masculine inflection en of the Pl. D. adjective. Een argen drag, an arrant rogue.—Brem. Wtb.

2. Arch in composition. Gr. ἀρχή, beginning, ἄρχειν, to be first. Ἀρχι in comp. signifies chief or principal, as in ἀρχιερεύς, ἀρχάγγελος, chief priest, arch-angel. This particle takes the form of arci in It., erz in G., arch in E. ; arci-vescovo, erz-bischof, arch-bishop. In G. as in E. it is also applied to pre-eminence in evil ; erz-betrüger, an arch-deceiver ; erz-wucherer, an arrant usurer.
Perhaps ARMS we fall the more readily into this application from the fact that our version of the Gr. particle is identical with arch applied on other grounds to pre-eminence in evil.

Architect. Gr. ἀρχιτέκτων (ἀρχή, and τέκτων, a builder, worker, from τείχω, to construct, fabricate), a chief builder.

Archives. Gr. ἀρχεῖον, the court of a magistrate, receptacle where the public acts were kept. The term would thus appear to be connected with ἄρχων, a ruler, ἀρχή, government, rule (principatus), and not with ἀρχαῖος, ancient. From ἀρχεῖον was formed Lat. archivum (as Argive from Ἀργεῖοι), a repository for records or public documents, and hence in modern languages the term archives is applied to the records themselves.

Ardent.—Ardour.—Arson. Lat. ardeo, arsum, Fr. ardre, ars, to be on fire, to burn ; ardor, burning heat. Fr. arson, a burning or setting on fire.—Cot.

Arduous. Lat. arduus, high, lofty, difficult to reach.

Area. Lat. area, a threshing-floor, a bare plot of ground, a court yard, an extent of flat surface. Applied in modern E. to the narrow yard between the underground part of a house and the ground in front.

Argue.—Argument. Lat. arguo, to demonstrate, make clear or prove.

Arid. Lat. aridus, from areo, to dry.

Aristocracy. Gr. ἀριστοκρατεία (ἄριστος, the best, bravest, a noble, and κρατέω, to rule, exercise lordship), ruling by the nobles, whence the body of the nobles collectively.

Arm. Sax. earm, Lat. armus, the shoulder-joint, especially of a brute, though sometimes applied to man. Connected with ramus, a branch, by Russ. ramo (pl. ramena), shoulder ; Boh. ramě, forearm ; rameno, arm, shoulder, branch.

Arms.—Army. Lat. arma, W. arf, Gael. arm, a weapon. As the arm itself is the natural weapon of offence, it is possible that the word arm in the sense of weapon may be simply an application of the same word as the designation of the bodily limb. From the verb armare, to arm, are formed the participial nouns. It. armata, Sp. armada, Fr. armée, of which the two former are confined by custom to a naval expedition, while the Fr. armée, and our army, which is derived from it, are applied only to an armed body of land forces, though formerly also used in the sense of a naval expedition.

At Leyes was he and at Satalie Whanne they were wonne, and in the grete see In many a noble armie had he be.
Prol. Knight's Tale.

Aromatic. Gr. ἀρωματικός, from ἄρωμα, sweetness of odours, a sweet smell.

Arquebuss. It. archibuso affords an example of a foreign word altered in order to square with a supposed etymology. It is commonly derived from arco, a bow, as the only implement of analogous effect before the invention of fire-arms, and buso, pierced, hollow. But Diez has well observed how incongruous an expression a hollow bow or pierced bow would be, and the true derivation is the Du. haeck-buyse, haeck-busse, properly a gun fired from a rest, from haeck, the hook or forked rest on which it is supported, and busse, G. büchse, a fire-arm. From haecke-busse it became harquebuss, and in It. archibuso or arcobugia, as if from arco, a bow. In Scotch it was called a hagbut of croche; Fr. arquebus à croc.—Jamieson.

Arrack. Ptg. araca, orraca, rak. From Arab. 'araq, sweat ; 'araq at-tamr, sweat (juice) of the date. The name of 'araq or 'araqi was first applied to the spirit distilled from the juice of the date-tree, and extended by the Arabs to distilled spirit in general, being applied by us to the rice spirit brought from the East Indies.—Dozy

To Arraign. In the Latin of the Middle Ages, rationes was the term for the pleadings in a suit ; rationes exercere, or ad rationes stare, to plead ; mittere or ponere ad rationes, or arrationare (whence in OFr. arraisonner, aresner, aregnier, arraigner), to arraign, i. e. to call one to account, to require him to plead, to place him under accusation.
Thos sal ilk man at his endyng Be putted til an hard rekenyng, And be aresoned, als right es Of alle his mysdedys, mare and les.
Pricke of Conscience, 2460.

In like manner was formed derationare, to clear one of the accusation, to deraign, to justify, to refute.

Arrant. Pre-eminent in something bad, as an arrant fool, thief, knave. ' An erraunt usurer.'—Pr. Pm. See Arch.

To Array. It. arredare, to prepare or dispose beforehand, to get ready. Arredare una casa, to furnish a house; uno vascello, to equip a ship. Arredo, household furniture, rigging of a ship, and in the plural arredi, apparel, raiment, as clothing is the equipment universally necessary. OFr. arroyer, arréer, to dispose, set in order, prepare, fit out. The simple verb is not extant in Italian, but is preserved to us in the ON. reida, the fundamental meaning of which seems to be to push forwards, to lay out. At reida sverdet, to wield a sword; at r. fram mat, to bring forth food ; at r. feit, to pay down money ; at r. til rumit, to prepare the bed ; at r. hey a hestinom, to carry hay on a horse. Sw. reda, to prepare, to set in order, to arrange ; reda ett skepp, to equip a vessel ; reda til middagen, to prepare dinner. The same word is preserved in the Scotch, to red, to red up, to put in order, to dress ; to red the road, to clear the way.—Jam.

The meaning of the Lat. paro, paratus, seems to have been developed on an analogous plan. The fundamental meaning of the simple paro seems to be to lay out, to push forwards. Thus separo is to lay things by themselves ; comparo to place them side by side ; preparo, to lay them out beforehand; and the It. parare, to ward off.

To Arrest. Lat. restare, to remain behind, to stand still. It. arrestare, Fr. arrester, to bring one to stand, to seize his person.

To Arrive. Mid. Lat. adripare, to come to shore, from ripa, bank, shore ; then generalised,—It. arrivare, Sp. arribar, Fr. arriver, to arrive.—Diez.

Arrogant. Lat. ad and rogo, to ask. Sibi aliquid arrogare, to ascribe something to oneself; arrogans, claiming more than one's due.

Arrow. ON. ör, gen. örvar, an arrow ; ör-varnar, missiles, probably from their whirring through the air ; 'örvarnar Hugo hvinandi yfir höfut theim,' the arrows flew whizzing over their heads.—Saga Sverris. p. 26. On the same principle It. freccia, an arrow, may be compared with Fr. frissement d'un trait, the whizzing sound of an arrow.—Cot. Sw. hurra, to whirl, hurl.

Arsenal. It. arzana, darsena, tarzana, a dock-yard, place of naval stores and outfit, dock. Sp. atarazana, atarazanal, a dock, covered shed over a rope-walk. From Arab. dár sinâ'a, dár-aş-şinâ'a, dár-aş-şanâ'a or dár-şanâ, a place of construction or work. It is applied by Edrisi to a manufacture of Morocco leather. Ibn-Khaldoun quotes an order of the Caliph Abdalmelic to build at Tunis ' a dár-sinâ'a for the construction of everything necessary for the equipment and armament of vessels.' Pedro de Alcala translates atarazana by the

Arab, dâr a cind'a.—Engelmann and Dozy.
Oportet ad illius (navigii) conservationem in locum pertrahi coopertum, qui locus, ubi dictum conservatur navigium, Aisena vulgariter appellatur.—Sanutus in Duc.
Arson. See Ardent.
Art. The exercise of skill or invention in the production of some material object or intellectual effect; the rules and method of well doing a thing; skill, contrivance, cunning.
Art and part, when a person is both the contriver of a crime and takes part in the execution, but commonly in the negative, neither art nor part. From the Lat. nec artifex nec particeps, neither contriver nor partaker.
Artery. Gr. ἀρτηρία, an air-receptacle (supposed from ἀήρ, and τηρέω, to keep, preserve), the windpipe, and thence any pulsating blood-channel.
Artichoke. Venet. articioco; Sp. al-cachofa; Arab. al-charschufa; It. carciofa.—Diez.
Article. Lat. articulus, diminutive of artus, a joint, a separate element or member of anything, an instant of time, a single member of a sentence, formerly applied to any part of speech, as tum, est, quisque (Forcellini), but ultimately confined to the particles the and an, the effect of which is to designate one particular individual of the species mentioned, or to show that the assertion applies to some one individual, and not to the kind at large.
Artillery. We find in Middle Latin the term ars, and the derivative artificium, applied in general to the implement with which anything is done, and specially to the implements of war, on the same principle that the Gr. μηχανή, the equivalent of the Lat. ars, gave rise to the word machina, a machine, and on which the word engine is derived from the Lat. ingenium, a contrivance. Thus a statute of the year 1352 enacts: Quod nulla persona—sit ausa venari in nemoribus consulum—sub pœna perdendi—artes, seu instrumenta cum quibus fieret venatio prædicta.—Duc. Cum magnis bombardis et plurimis diversis artificialibus.—Duc.
From ars seems to have been formed the Fr. verb artiller, in the general sense of exercising a handicraft, or performing skilled work, subsequently applied to the manufacturing or supplying with munitions of war. In testimony of the more general sense we find artiliaria, and thence the modern Fr. atelier, a workshop: Quod eligantur duo legates homines qui vadant cum officiali ad visitandum omnes artiliarias exercentes artem pannorum.—Stat. A. D. 1360, in Duc.
Artillement, artillerie, is given by Roquefort in the sense of implement, furniture, equipment, as well as instrument of war, and the word is used by Rymer in the more general sense:—Decem et octo discos argenti, unum calicem argenteum, unum parvum tintinnabulum pro missa, &c., et omnes alias artillarias sibi competentes.
A Statute of Edward II. shows what was understood by artillery in that day: Item ordinatum est quod sit unus artillator qui faciat balistas, carellos, arcos, sagittas, lanceas, spiculas, et alia arma necessaria pro garnizionibus castrorum.
So, in the Book of Samuel, speaking of bow and arrows, it is said, ' And Jonathan gave his artillery to the lad, and said, Go carry them to the city.'
As. The comparison of the G. dialects shows that as is a contraction from all-so; AS. eallswa; G. also, als, as (Schülze, Schmeller), OFris. alsa, alse, als, asa, ase, as (Richthofen). ' als auch wir vergeben unsern schuldigern,' as we also forgive our debtors.—Schmeller. Also, sic, omnino, taliter, ita.—Kilian. Fris. ' alsa grate bote alsa,' G. ' eben so grosse busse als,' as great a fine as ; Fris. ' alsoe graet als,' ' alsoe graet ende alsoe lytich als,' as great and as small as ; ' alsoe ofte als,' as often as. In OE. we often find als for also. Schyr Edward that had sic valour Was dede; and Jhone Stewart alsua. And Jhone the Sowllis als with tha And othyr als of thar company.—Bruce, xii. 795.
Schir Edward that day wald nocht ta His cot armour; but Gib Harper, That men held als withoutyn per Of his estate, had on that day All hale Schir Edwardis array.—Bruce, xii. 782. i. e. whom men held as without equal of his station.
So in German, ' ein solcher, als er ist,'—such a one as he is.—Schmeller. In expressions like as great as, where two as correspond to each other, the Germans render the first by so, the second by als; in OE. the first was commonly written als, the second as, Thai wer To Weris water cummyn als ner As on othyr halff their fayis wer. Bruce, xiv. 102.

Of all that grete tresoure that ever he biwan Als bare was his towere as Job the powere man. R. Brunne.
But this is probably only because the second as, having less emphasis upon it than the first, bore more contraction, just as we have seen in the corresponding Frisian expressions that the first as is rendered by alsoe, the second by als. In other cases the Frisian expression is just the converse of the G. Fris. alsa longe sa = G. so lange als, as long as; Fris. asa fir sa—G. so weit als, as far as; Fris. alsa fir sa, in so far as.
Ascetic. Gr. ἀσκητικὸς (ἀσκέω, to practise, exercise as an art), devoted to the practice of sacred duties, meditation, &c. Hence the idea of exercising rigorous self-discipline.
Ash. 1. The tree. AS. æsc, ON. askr. 2. Dust. Goth. azgo, AS. asca, ON. aska, Esthon. ask, refuse, dung.
Ashlar. Hewn stone. OFr. aiseler, Sc. aislair. 'Entur le temple—fud un murs de treiz estruiz de aiselers qui bien furent polls:'—tribus ordinibus lapidum politorum.—Livre des Rois. 'A mason cannocht hew ain evin aislair without directioun of his rewill.'—Jam. Fr. 'bouttice, an ashlar or binding-stone in building.'—Cot.
Fr. aiseler seems to be derived from aisselle (Lat. axilla), the hollow beneath the arm or between a branch and the stem of a tree, applied to the angle between a rafter and the wall on which it rests, or between two members of a compound beam in centering. Aisselier, then, or esselier, in carpentry, is the bracket which supports a beam, or the quartering-piece which clamps a rafter to the wall (pièce de bois qu'on assemble dans un chevron et dans la rainure, pour cintrer des quartiers (Gattel); pour former les quartiers dans une charpente à lambris; qui sert à former les cintres, ou qui soutient par les bouts les entrans ou tirans.—Trevoux). From thus serving to unite the segments of a compound beam the name seems to have been transferred to a binding-stone in masonry, and thence to any hewn and squared stone mixed with rubblestone in building.
To Ask. AS. acsian, ascian, ON. æskia, G. heischen.
* Askaunce, Askaunt. OFr. a scanche, de travers, en lorgnant.—Palsgr. 831. It. schiancio, athwart, across, against the grain; aschianciare, to go awry; scanzare, scansare, to turn aside, slip aside, walk by.—Fl. Both askant and the synonymous aslant may be traced through Sc. asklent, askew, to W. ysglentio, OFr. esclincher, to slip or slide. En etclenkaunt (esclenchant), obliquando.—Neccham in Nat. Antiq. Then by the loss of the l on the one hand, askaunt; and of the k on the other, Sw. slinta, to slide, and E. aslant. The rudiment of the lost l is seen in the i of It. schiancio, and wholly obliterated in scanzare. The Du. schuin, N. skjons (pron. shons), oblique, wry, i skjons, awry, seem to belong to a totally different root connected with E. shun, shunt, to push aside, move aside.
Askew. ON. skeifr, Dan. skjæv, G. schief, schäf, schieb, schiebicht, oblique, wry; ON. á ská, askew. Gr. σκαιός, Lat. scævus, properly oblique, then left, on the left hand; σκαιὸν στόμα, a wry mouth.
From G. schieben, to shove, as shown by Du. schuin, oblique, compared with E. shun, shunt, to push aside. G. verschieben, to put out of its place, to set awry.
Asperity. Lat. asper, rough.
To Aspire.—Aspirate. Lat. aspiro, to pant after, to pretend to, from spiro, to breathe. The Lat. aspiro is also used for the strong breathing employed in pronouncing the letter h, thence called the aspirate, a term etymologically unconnected with the spiritus asper of the Latin grammarians.
Ass. Lat. asinus, G. esel, Pol. osiol.
To Assail.—Assault. Lat. salire, to leap, to spring; Fr. saillir, to sally, to leap; assaillir, to assail, to set upon, whence assault, assailing or setting upon.
Assart. A cleared place in a wood. Fr. essart, Mid. Lat. exartum, essartum, assartum, sartum.
Essarta vulgo dicuntur—quando forestæ, nemora, vel dumeta quælibet—succiduntur, quibus succisis et radicitus evulsis terra subvertitur et excolitur.—Lib. Scacch. in Duc.
Et quicquid in toto territorio Laussiniaco diruptum et exstirpatum est quod vulgo dicitur exsars.—Chart. A. D. 1196, in Duc.
From ex-saritum, grubbed up.—Diez. Lat. sarrio, sario, to hoe, to weed.
Assassin. Hashish is the name of an intoxicating drug prepared from hemp in use among the natives of the East. Hence Arab. 'Haschischin,' a name given to the members of a sect in Syria who wound themselves up by doses of hashish to perform at all risk the orders of their Lord, known as the Sheik, or Old Man of the Mountain. As the murder of his enemies would be the most dreaded of these behests, the name of Assassin was given to one commissioned to perform a murder ; assassination, a murder performed by one lying in wait for that special purpose.—Diez. De Sacy, Mem. de l'Institut, 1818.
To Assay. Lat. exigere, to examine, to prove by examination ; ' annulis ferreis ad certum pondus exactis pro nummo utuntur,' iron rings proved of a certain weight.—Cæsar. Hence, exagium, a weighing, a trial, standard weight. 'Εξάγιον, pensitatio ; ἐξαγιάζω, examino, perpendo.—Gl. in Duc.

De ponderibus quoque, ut fraus penitus amputetur, a nobis agantur exagia (proof specimens) quæ sine fraude debent custodiri.—Novell. Theodosii in Duc.
Habetis aginam (a balance), exagium facite, quemadmodum vultis ponderate.—Zeno, ibid.

From exagium was formed the It. saggio, a proof, trial, sample, taste of anything ; assaggiare, to prove, try, taste, whence Fr. essayer, to try, and E. assay, essay.—Mur. Diss. 27, p. 585.
To Assemble. The origin of Lat. simul, together, at once, is probably the radical sam, very widely spread in the sense of same, self. The locative case of Fin. sama, the same, is samalla, adverbially used in the sense of at once, together, which seems to explain the formation of Lat. simul. From simul, insimul, were formed It. insieme, Fr. ensemble, together ; assembler, to draw together, s'assembler, to meet or flock together ; whence E. assemble. In the Germanic branch of language we have Goth. sama, the same ; samana (corresponding to Fin. samalla), Sw. samman, G. zusammen, AS. te somne, to the same place, together ; samnian, somnian, Sw. sammla, Dan. samle, G. versammeln, to collect, to assemble. The OE. assemble was often used in the special sense of joining in battle.

By Carhame assemblyd thai ; Thare was hard fychting as I harde say. Wyntown in Jam.
And in old Italian we find sembiaglia in the same sense. ' La varatta era fornita. Non poteo a sio patre dare succurso. Non poteo essere a la sembiaglia.' In the Latin translation, ' conflictui interesse nequibat.'—Hist. Rom. Fragm. in Muratori.
To Assess. Assidere, assessum, to sit down, was used in Middle Lat. in an active sense for to set, to impose a tax ; assidere talliam ; in Fr. asseoir la taille, to fix a certain amount upon each individual.
Provisum est generaliter quod prædicta quadragesima hoc modo assideatur et colligatur.—Math. Paris, a. d. 1232.
Et fuit quodlibet feodum militare assessum tunc ad 40 sol.—Duc.
Assets, in legal language, are funds for the satisfaction of certain demands. Commonly derived from Fr. assez, but in OE. it was commonly written asseth.
And if it suffice not for asseth.—P. Plowman, p. 94.
And Pilat willing to make aseeth to the people left to hem Barabbas.—Wiclif, Mark 15.
And though on heapes that lie him by, Yet never shall make his richesse Asseth unto his greediness.—R. R.
Make aceethe (makyn seethe—K.), satisfacio.—Pr. Pm. ' Now then, rise and go forthe and speking do aseethe to thy servauntis'—Wicliffe ; satisfac servis tuis—Vulgate. ' Therefore I swore to the hows of Heli that the wickedness of his hows shall not be doon aseeth before with slain sacrificis and giftis.'—Wiclif. In the Vulgate, expietur. Assyth, sithe, to make compensation, to satisfy. ' I have gotten my heart's sithe on him.'—Lye in Junius, v. sythe. Gael. sioth, sith, peace, quietness, rest from war, reconciliation ; sithich, calm, pacify, assuage, reconcile ; W. hedd, tranquillity, heddu, to pacify ; Pol. Bohem. syt, syty, satisfied, full ; Bohem. sytiti, to satisfy. The Lat. satis, enough ; ON. sætt, sætti, reconciliatio, sættr, reconciliatus, contentus, consentiens ; sætia, saturare ; G. satt, full, satisfied,—are doubtless all fundamentally related.
Assiduous. Lat. assiduus, sitting down, seated, constantly present, unremitting.
Assize.—Assizes. From assidere was formed OFr. assire, to set, whence assis, set, seated, settled ; assise, a set rate, a tax, as assize of bread, the settled rate for the sale of bread ; also a set day, whence cour d'assize, a court to be held on a set day, E. assizes.
Ballivos nostros posuimus qui in baliviis suis singulis mensibus ponent unum diem qui dicitur Assisia in quo omnes illi qui clamorem facient recipient jus suum.—Charta Philip August. A.D. 1190, in Duc.
Assisa in It. is used for a settled pattern of dress, and is the origin of E. size, a settled cut or make.
To Assoil. To acquit. Lat. absolvere, to loose from ; OFr. absolver, absoiller, assoiler.—Roquefort. ' To whom spak Sampson, Y shal purpose to yow a dowtous woud, the which if ye soylen to me, &c.; forsothe if ye mowen not assoyle, &c. And they mighten not bi thre days soylen the proposicioun.'—Wyclif, Judges xiv. 12, &c.
To Assuage. From Lat. suavis, sweet, agreeable, Prov. suau, sweet, agreeable, soft, tranquil, OFr. soef, souef, sweet, soft, gentle, arise, Prov. assuauzar, assuavar, assuaviar, to appease, to calm, to soften. Hence, OFr. assouager, to soften, to allay, answering to assuaviar, as allager to alleviare, abreger to abbreviare, agreger to aggraviare, soulager to solleviare.
Mais moult m' assouagea l' oingture.—R. R.; translated by Chaucer, Now softening with the ointment.

Asthma. Gr. ἄσθμα, panting, difficult breathing.

To Astonish. — Astound. — Stony.
Fr. estonner, to astonish, amaze, daunt; also to stonnie, benumme or dull the senses of.—Cotgr. The form astonish shows that estonnir must also have been in use. According to Diez, from Lat. attonare, attonitum (strengthened to extonare), to thunder at, to stun, to stupefy. So in E. thunder-struck is used for a high degree of astonishment. But probably the root ton in attonitus is used rather as the representative of a loud overpowering sound in general, than specially of thunder. Thus we have din, a loud continued noise; dint, a blow; to dun, to make an importunate noise; dunt, a blow or stroke; to dunt, to confuse by noise, to stupefy.—Halliwell. AS. stunian, to strike, to stun, to make stupid with noise; stunt, stupefied, foolish; G. erstaunen, to be in the condition of one stunned.

Astute. Lat. astus, subtilty, craft.

Asylum. Lat. asylum, from Gr. ἄσυλον (a priv., and συλάω, to plunder, injure), a place inviolable, safe by the force of consecration.

At. ON. at, Dan. at, equivalent to E. to before a verb, at segia, to say; Lat. ad, to; Sanscr. adhi, upon.

Athletic. Gr. ἄθλος, a contest for a prize; ἀθλητής, a proficient in muscular exercises.

Atlas. Gr. Ἄτλας, the name of one who was fabled to support on his shoulders the entire vault of heaven, the globe; thence, applied to a book of maps of the countries of the globe: which had commonly a picture of Atlas supporting the globe for a frontispiece.

Atmosphere. Gr. Ἀτμός, smoke, vapour.

Atom. Gr. ἄτομος (from a privative and τέμνω, to cut), indivisible, that does not admit of cutting or separation.

Atone. To bring at one, to reconcile, and thence to suffer the pains of whatever sacrifice is necessary to bring about a reconciliation.
If gentilmen or other of that contrei Were wroth, she wolde bringen hem at on. So wise and ripe wordes hadde she. Chaucer in R.
One God, one Mediator (that is to say, advocate, intercessor, or an atone-maker) between God and man.—Tyndall in R.
Lod. Is there division 'twixt my Lord and Cassio?
Des. A most unhappy one; I would do much T' attone them for the love I bear to Cassio. Othello.
The idea of reconciliation was expressed in the same way in Fr. Il ot amis et anemis; Or sont-il tot à un mis. Fab. et Contes. i. 181.
OE. to one, to unite, to join in one.
David saith the rich folk that embraceden and oneden all hir herte to treasour of this world shall slepe in the sleping of deth.—Chaucer in R.
Put together and onyd, continuus; put together but not onyd, contiguus.—Pr. Pm.
Precisely the converse of this expression is seen in G. entzweyen, to disunite, sow dissension, from enzwey, in two; sich entzweyen, to quarrel, fall into variance.—Küttn.

Atrocious. Lat. atrox, fierce, barbarous, cruel.

To Attach.—Attack. These words, though now distinct, are both derived from the It. attaccare, to fasten, to hang. Venet. tacare; Piedm. taché, to fasten. Hence in Fr. the double form, attacher, to tie, to fasten, to stick, to attach, and attaquer, properly to fasten on, to begin a quarrel. S'attacher is also used in the same sense; s'attacher à, to cope, scuffle, grapple, fight with.—Cotgr. It. attacare un chiodo, to fasten a nail; — la guerra, to commence war; — la battaglia, to engage in battle; — il fuoco, to set on fire; attaccarsi il fuoco, to catch fire; — di parole, to quarrel.
To attach one, in legal language, is to lay hold of one, to apprehend him under a charge of criminality.

Attainder.—Attaint. Fr. attaindre (OFr. attainder—Roquef.), to reach or attain unto, hit or strike in reaching, to overtake, bring to pass, also to attaint or convict, also to accuse or charge with.—Cotgr. The institution of a judicial accusation is compared to the pursuit of an enemy; the proceedings are called a suit, Fr. poursuite en jugement, and the agency of the plaintiff is expressed by the verb prosequi, to pursue. In following out the metaphor the conduct of the suit to a successful issue in the conviction of the accused is expressed by the verb attingere, Fr. attaindre, which signifies the apprehension of the object of a chase.
Quem fugientem dictus Raimundus atinxit. Hence the Fr. attainte d'une cause, the gain of a suit; attaindre le meffait, to fix the charge of a crime upon one, to prove a crime.—Carp. Atains du fet, convicted of the fact, caught by it, having it brought home to one.—Roquef.

Attire. OFr. atour, attour, a French hood, also any kind of tire or attire for a woman's head. Damoiselle d'atour, the waiting-woman that uses to dress or attire her mistress—Cotgr., — a tirewoman. Attouré, tired, attired, dressed, trimmed, adorned. Attourner, to attire, deck, dress. Attourneur, one that waits in the chamber to dress his master or his mistress.
The original sense of attiring was that of preparing or getting ready for a certain purpose, from the notion of turning towards it, by a similar train of thought to that by which the sense of dress, clothing, is derived from directing to a certain end, preparing for it, clothing being the most universally necessary of all preparations. He attired him to battle with force that he had. R. Brunne in R.
What does the king of France? atires him good navie.—Ibid.
The change from atour to attire is singular, but we find them used with apparent indifference.
By her atire so bright and shene Men might perceve well and sene She was not of Religioun, Nor n' il I make mencioun Nor of robe, nor of tresour, Of broche, neither of her rich attour.—R. R.
Riche atyr, noble vesture, Bele robe ou riche pelure.—Polit. Songs.
OFr. atirer, attirer, atirier, ajuster, convenir, accorder, orner, decorer, parer, preparer, disposer, regler.—Roquefort.
I tyer an egg: je accoustre: I tyer with garments: je habille and je accoustre.—Palsgr.

Attitude. Posture of body. It. atto, from Lat. agere, actum, act, action, posture; It. attitudine, promptness, disposition to act, and also simply posture, attitude.

Attorney. Mid. Lat. attornatus, one put in the turn or place of another, one appointed to execute an office on behalf of another.
Li atorni est cil qui pardevant justice est atorni pour aucun en Eschequier ou en Assise pour poursuivre et pour defendre sa droiture.—Jus Municipale Normannorum, in Duc.

Auburn. Now applied to a rich red-brown colour of hair, but originally it probably designated what we now call flaxen hair. The meaning of the word is simply whitish. It. albumo, the white or sapwood of timber, ' also that whitish colour of women's hair called an album-colour.'—Fl. '[Cometa] splendoris alburni radium producens.'—Duc. In the Walser dialect of the Grisons, alb is used in the sense of yellowish brown like the colour of a brown sheep.—Bühler.

Auction.—Augment. Lat. augeo, auctum, Gr. αὔξω, Goth. aukan, AS. eacan, to increase, to eke.

Audacious. Lat. audax,-acis; audeo, I dare.

Audience.—Audit. In the law language of the middle ages audire was specially applied to the solemn hearing of a court of justice, whence audientia was frequently used as synonymous with judgment, court of justice, &c., and even in the sense of suit at law. The Judge was termed auditor, and the term was in particular applied to persons commissioned to inquire into any special matter. The term was then applied to the notaries or officers appointed to authenticate all legal acts, to hear the desires of the parties, and to take them down in writing; also to the parties witnessing a deed. 'Testes sunt hujus rei visores et auditores, &c. Hoc viderunt et audierunt isti, &c.'—Duc.
At the present day the term is confined to the investigation of accounts, the examination and allowance of which is termed the audit, the parties examining, the auditors.

Auf. Auff, a fool or silly fellow.—B. See Oaf.

Auger. An implement for drilling holes, by turning round a centre which is steadied against the pit of the stomach. Formerly written nauger, Du. evegher, nevegher. In cases like these, which are very numerous in language, it is impossible primâ facie to say whether an n has been added in the one case or lost in the other. In the present case the form with an initial n is undoubtedly the original. AS. naf-rnr, naf-ior. Taradros [a gimlet], napa gerð.—Gloss. Cassel. The force of the former element of the word is explained from the Finnish napa, a navel, and hence, the middle of anything, centre of a circle, axis of a wheel. In composition it signifies revolution, as from meren, the sea, meren-napa, a whirlpool; from rauta, iron, napa-rauta, the iron stem on which the upper millstone rests and turns; maan-napa, the axis of the earth. With kaira, a borer, the equivalent of AS. gar, it forms napa-kaira, exactly corresponding to the common E. name of the tool, a centre-bit, a piercer acting by the revolution of the tool round a fixed axis or centre. Lap. nape, navel, centre, axle.
The other element of the word corresponding to the Fin. kaira, AS. gar, is identical with the E. gore, in the sense of being gored by a bull, i. e. pierced by his horns. AS. gar, a javelin, gara, an angular point of land.
Aught or Ought. Something; as naught or nought, nothing. AS. á-wiht, OHG. eo-wiht; modern G. icht; from á, G. aiv, ever, and wiht, Goth. waihts, a thing. See Wiht.
Augur.—Augury, See Auspice.
Aunt. Lat. amita. OFr. ante. Icilz oncles avoit la sole ante espousée.—Chron. Du Guesclin. 264. A similar contraction takes place in emmet, ant.
Auspice.—Auspicious. Lat. auspex for avispex (as auceps, a bird-catcher, for aviceps), a diviner by the observation of (Lat. avis) birds. As the augur drew his divinations from the same source, the element gur is probably the equivalent of spex in auspex, and reminds us of OE. gaure, to observe, to stare.
Austere. Lat. austerus, from Gr. αὐστηρός, harsh, severe, rough.
Authentic. Gr. αὐθέντης, one who acts or owns in his own right (der. from αὐτός, and τίθημι, mittere), αὐθεντικός, backed by sufficient authority.
Author. Lat. auctor (augco, auctum, to increase), a contriver, originator, maker; auctoritas, the right of the maker over the thing made, jurisdiction, power.
Automaton. Gr. αὐτόματος, self-moving, self-acting; αὐτός, self, and μάομαι, I stir myself, am stirred.
Autumn. Lat. autumnus. Sometimes written auctumnus, as if from auctum, increase; the time when the increase of the earth is gathered in.

Auxiliary. Lat. auxilium, help. See Auction.
To Avail. 1. To be of service. Fr. valoir, to be worth; Lat. valere, to be well in health, to be able, to be worth.
2. To Avail or Avale, to lower. To vail his flag, to lower his flag. Fr. à val, downwards; à mont et à val, towards the hill and towards the vale, upwards and downwards. Hence avaler, properly to let down, to lower, now used in the sense of swallowing.
Avalanche. A fall of snow sliding down from higher ground in the Alps. Mid. Lat. avalantia, a slope, declivity, descent, from Fr. avaler, to let down.—Carp.
Avarice. Lat. avarus, covetous; aveo, to desire, to rejoice.
Avast. A nautical expression for hold, stop, stay. Avast talking!' cease talking! Old Cant, a waste, away; bing a waste, go you hence.—Rogue's Dict. in modern slang. Probably waste has here the sense of empty; go into empty space, avoid thee. In wast, in vain.—W. and the Werewolf.
They left thair awin schip standand twaist. Squyer Meldrum, 1. 773.
Avaunt. Begone! Fr. avant, before; en avant! forwards!
Avenue. Fr. advenue, avenue, an access, passage, or entry unto a place.—Cot. Applied in E. to the double row of trees by which the approach to a house of distinction was formerly marked. Lat. venire, to come.
To Aver. Lat. verus, true; Fr. avérer, to maintain as true.
Aver. A beast of the plough. The Fr. avoir (from habere, to have), as well as Sp. haber, was used in the sense of goods, possessions, money. This in Mid. Lat. became avera, or averia.
Taxati pactione quod salvis corporibus suis et averis et equis et armis cum pace recederent.—Chart. A. D. 1166. In istum sanctum locum, venimus cum Averos nostros.—Chart. Hisp. A. D. 819. Et in toto quantum Rex Adelfonsus tenet de rege Navarræ melioret cum suo proprio avere, quantum voluerit et poterit.—Hoveden, in Duc.
Averii, or Averia, was then applied to cattle in general, as the principal possession in early times.
Hoc placitum dilationem non recipit propter averia, i. e. animalia muta, ne diu detineantur inclusa.—Regiam Majestatem. Si come jeo bayle à un home mes berbis a campester, ou mes bœufs à arer la terre et il occist mes avers.—Littleton.
We then have averia carrucæ, beasts of the plough; and the word avers finally came to be confined to the signification of cart-horses.
\* Average. 1. Average is explained as duty work done for the Lord of the manor with the avers or draught cattle of the tenants. Sciendum est quod unumquodque averagium æstivale debet fieri inter Hokday et gulam Augusti.—Spelman in Duc. But probably the reference to the avers of the tenant may be a mistaken accommodation. From Dan. hof, court, are formed hovgaard, the manor to which a tenant belongs; hovarbeide or hoveri, duty work to which the tenant was bound; hovdag, duty days on which he was bound to service for the Lord, &c. Money paid in lieu of this duty work is called hoveri penge, corresponding to the aver-penny of our old records. 'Aver-penny, hoc est quietum esse de diversis denariis pro averagio Domini Regis.'—Rastal in Duc.
2. In the second place average is used in the sense of 'a contribution made by all the parties in a sea-adventure according to the interest of each to make good a specific loss incurred for the benefit of all.'—Worcester. To average a loss among shippers of merchandise is to distribute it among them according to their interest, and from this mercantile sense of the term it has come in ordinary language to signify a mean value. In seeking the derivation of average, with its continental representatives, Fr. avaris, avarie, It., Sp. avaria, Du. ahaverie, averie, G. haferey, haverey, averey, the first question will be whether we are to look for its origin to the shores of the Baltic or the Mediterranean. Now according to Mr Marsh the word does not occur in any of the old Scandinavian or Teutonic sea-codes, even in the chapters containing provisions for apportioning the loss by throwing goods overboard. On the other hand, it is of very old standing in the Mediterranean, occurring in the Assises de Jerusalem, cxlv. Assises de la Baisse Court. 'Et sachies que celui aver qui est gete ne doit estre conte fors tant com il cousta ô toutes ses averies:' and know that any goods that are thrown overboard shall only be reckoned at what it cost with all charges. The old Venetian version gives as the equivalent of avaries, dazii e spese. The derivation from ON. haf, the sea, or from haven, must then be given up.

The general meaning of the word is damage by accident or incidental expenses incurred by ship or cargo during the voyage. Fr. grosses avaries, loss by tempest, shipwreck, capture, or ransom; menues avaries, expenses incurred on entering or leaving port, harbour duties, tonnage, pilotage, &c. In a secondary sense avarie is applied to the waste or leakage of goods in keeping, the wear and tear of a machine, &c.—Gattel. S'ava-rier, to suffer avarie, to become damaged. In the Consulado del Mar of the middle of the 13th century the notary is authorized to take pledges from every shipper for the value of 'lo nolit è les avaries:' the freight and charges. Marsh gives other instances in Spanish and Catalonian where the word is used in the sense of government duties and charges. 'Lo receptor de les haueries de les com-positions que fa la Regia Cort, y lo re-ceptor dels salaris dels Doctors de la Real Audiencia,' &c.—Drets de Catalunya, A. D. 1584. In the Genoese annals of the year 1413, quoted by Muratori, it is said that the Guelphs enjoyed the honours and benefices of the city, 'secundum ipsorum numerum, et illud quod in publicis solutionibus, quæ Averia dicuntur, expendunt.'
Marsh is inclined to agree with Santa Rosa in deriving the word from the Turkish avania, properly signifying aid, help, but used in the sense of a government exaction, a very frequent word in the Levant. The real origin however is Arab. 'awar, a defect or flaw, which is the technical term corresponding to Fr. avarie. Kazomirski renders it 'vice, defaut,' and adds an example of its use as applied to 'marchandise qui a des defauts.' The primary meaning of the word would thus be that which is understood by grosses avaries, charges for accidental damage, from whence it might easily pass to other charges.
To Avoid. Properly to make void or empty, to make of none effect. To avoid a contract, to make it void, and hence to escape from the consequences of it. To confess and avoid, in legal phrase, was to admit some fact alleged by the adversary, and then to make it of none effect by showing that it does not bear upon the case.
Tell me your fayth, doe you beleeve that there is a living God that is mighty to punish his enemies? If you beleeve it, say unto me, can you devise for to avoyde hys vengeance?—Barnes in R.

Here the word may be interpreted either way: Can you devise to make void his vengeance, or to escape his vengeance, showing clearly the transition to the modern meaning. So in the following passage from Milton:— Not diffident of thee do I dissuade Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid The attempt itself intended by our foe.
To avoid was also used as Fr. vuider, vider la maison, Piedm. voidd na cà, to clear out from a house, to make it empty, to quit, to keep away from a place.
Anno H. VII. it was enacted that all Scots dwelling within England and Wales should avoid the realm within 40 days of proclamation made. —Rastal, in R.
It is singular that we should thus witness the development within the E. language of a word agreeing so closely in sound and meaning with Lat. evitare, Fr. éviter; but in cases of this kind it will, I believe, often be found that the Latin word only exhibits a previous example of the same line of development from one original root. I cannot but believe that the radical meaning of Lat. vitare is to give a wide berth to, to leave an empty space between oneself and the object. Fr. vuide, vide, empty, waste, vast, wide, free from, not cumbered or troubled with.—Cotgr. To shoot wide of the mark is to miss, to avoid the mark; OHG. wit, empty; witi, vacuitas.—Graff.
Avoir-du-poise. The ordinary measure of weight. OFr. avoirs de pois, goods that sell by weight and not by measurement.
To Avow.—Avouch. Under the feudal system, when the right of a tenant was impugned he had to call upon his lord to come forwards and defend his right. This in the Latin of the time was called advocare, Fr. voucher à garantie, to vouch or call to warrant. Then as the calling on an individual as lord of the fee to defend the right of the tenant involved the admission of all the duties implied in feudal tenancy, it was an act jealously looked after by the lords, and advocare, or the equivalent Fr. avouer, to avow, came to signify the admission by a tenant of a certain person as feudal superior.
Nihil ab eo se tenere in feodo aut quoquo modo alio advocabat.—Chron. A. D. 1296. Ita tamen quod dictus Episcopus et successores sui nos et successores nostros Comites Flandriæ qui pro tempore fuerint, si indiguerint auxilio, advocabit, nec alium dominum secularem poterunt advocare.—Charta A. D. 1250. Donec advocatus fuerit ut burgensis noster.—Stat. Louis le Hutin.
1315.—until he shall be acknowledged as our burgess. Recognoscendo seu profitendo ab illis ea tanquam a superioribus se tenere seu ab ipsis eadem advocando, prout in quibusdam partibus Gallicanis vulgariter dicitur advouer.—Concil. Lugdun. A. D. 1274. A personis laicis tanquam à superioribus ea quæ ab Ecclesia tenent advouasse tenere.—A. D. 1315, in Duc.
Finally, with some grammatical confusion, Lat. advocare, and E. avow or avouch, came to be used in the sense of performing the part of the vouchee or person called on to defend the right impugned. Et prædicti Vice-comites advocant (maintain) prædictum attachionamentum justum, eo quod, &c.—Lib. Alb. 406. To avow, to justify a thing already done, to maintain or justify, to affirm resolutely or boldly, to assert.—Bailey.
—I could With barefaced power sweep him from my sight, And bid my will avouch it.—Macbeth.
Avowtery, Avowterer. The very common change of d into v converted Lat. adulterium into It. avolterio, avolteria, avoltero. Hence avolteratore, Prov. avoutrador, OE. avowterer, an adulterer. A d was sometimes inserted; OFr. avoultre, advoultre, avotre, OE. advoutry, adultery.
Award. The primitive sense of ward is shown in the It. guardare, Fr. regarder, to look. Hence Rouchi eswarder (answering in form to E. award), to inspect goods, and, incidentally, to pronounce them good and marketable; eswardeur, an inspector.—Hecart.
An award is accordingly in the first place the taking a matter into consideration and pronouncing judgment upon it, but in later times the designation has been transferred exclusively to the consequent judgment.
In like manner in OE. the verb to look is very often found in the sense of consideration, deliberation, determination, award, decision. When William Rufus was in difficulties with his brother Robert, about the partition of the Conqueror's inheritance, he determined to go to the King of France to submit the matter to his award. He says (in Peter Langtoft, p. 86): Therfore am I comen to wite at yow our heued, The londes that we have nomen to whom they shall be leued, And at your jugement I will stand and do With thi that it be ent (ended) the strif bituen us tuo.
Philip said, blithely, and sent his messengers Tille Inglond to the clergy, erles, barons, therpers. And askid if thei wild stand to ther lokyng.

—where looking is used exactly in the sense of the modern award.
These senses of look are well exemplified in a passage from R. G. p. 567.
To chese six wise men hii lokede there Three bishops and three barons the wisest that there were— And bot hii might accordi, that hii the legate took, And Sir Henry of Almaine right and law to look— Tho let the king someni age the Tiwesday Next before All Hallow tide as his council bisai, Bishops and Abbots and Priors thereto, Erles and Barons and Knightes also, That hii were at Northampton to hear and at stonde To the loking of these twelve of the state of the londe.
—to the award or determination of these twelve.
There it was dispeopled the edict I wis That was the ban of Keningworth, that was lo! this; That there ne should of high men desherited be none That had iholde age the King but the Erl of Leicetre one; Ac that all the othere had agen all hor lond.
Other hor heirs that dede were, but that the King in his hand It hulde to an term that there iloked was, Five year some and some four, ever up his trespas.
Chatel forfait par agard des viscountes.—Lib. Albus. I. 119. Si fut agardé qe Willame, &c.—Ib. 110.
Conseillez mei, si esgardez Qu' en serreit al regne honorable.
Benoit. Chron. Norm. 6135.
Awe. Fear, dread, reverence; then transferred to the cause of fear, assuming the signification of anger, discipline, chastisement.
But her fiers servant (Una's Lion) full of kingly awe And high disdaine, whenas his soveraine dame So rudely handled by her foe he saw, With gaping jaws full gredy at him came.
AS. ege, oga, egisa, Goth. agis, fear, dread, ogan, to fear, ogjan, to threaten, terrify, ON. agi, discipline, egir, terrible; Ægia, to be an object of wonder or fear; mer ægir, I am amazed, I am terrified; ogn, terror; Sw. dial. aga, fear; agasam, frightful, awsome; Dan. ave, chastisement, correction, awe, fear, discipline.
At staae under eens ave, to stand in awe of one; at holde i stræng ave, to keep a strict hand over. Gr. ἄγη, wonder, ἀγάο-μαι, ἀγάζομαι, to wonder at, to be angry.
Awgrim. Decimal arithmetic.
Then satte summe As siphre doth in awgrym, That notith a place And no thing availith.
Political Poems, Cam. Soc. p. 414.
I reken, I counte by cyfers of agrym: je en-chiffre. I shall reken it syxe tymes by aulgorisme, or you can cast it ones by counters.—Palsgr.
Sp. alguarismo, from Al Khowdrezmi, the surname of the Arabian algebrist, the translation of whose work was the means of introducing the decimal notation into Europe in the 12th century.
Awhape. To dismay; properly, to take away the breath with astonishment, to stand in breathless astonishment.
Ah my dear gossip, answered then the ape.
Deeply do your sad words my wits awhape.
Mother Hubbard's tale in Boucher.
W. chwaff, a gust; Lith. kvapas, breath; Goth. afhvapjan, ON. kefja, to choke, to suffocate; Goth. afhvaptian, ON. kafna, to be choked; Sw. quaf, choking, oppressive.
Awk.—Awkward. Perverted, perverse, indirect, left-handed, unskilful. To ring the bells awk is to ring them backwards.
They with awkward judgment put the chief point of godliness in outward things, as in the choice of meats, and neglect those things that be of the soul.—Udal in R.
That which we in Greek call ἀριστερόν, that is to say, on the awk or left hand, they say in Latin sinistrum.—Holland, Pliny in R.
The word seems formed from ON. af, Lat. ab, E. off, of, signifying deviation, error, the final k being an adjectival termination. Thus, ON. af-gata, iter devium, divortium; af-krokr, diverticulum, a side way; ofugr, inversus, sinister; öfug-fleiri, a flat-fish with eyes on the left side; öfug-nefni, a name given from antiphrasis; öfug-ord, verbum obliquum, impertinens, offensum; öfga, to change, degenerate. Sw. afwig, inside out, averse, disinclined, awkward, unskilful; afwig-hand, the back of the hand. Dan. avet, crooked, preposterous, perverse.
G. ab in composition indicates the contrary or negation; abgrund, abyss, bottomless pit; abgott, false god; abhold, unkind; ablernen, to unlearn; aberglaube, false belief; aber-papst, aber-könig, false pope, false king. In aben, inside out.—Schmeller. In Flemish we see the passage towards the u or w of awk; aue saghe, absurda narratio, sermo absonus; aue gaen, aue hanghen, &c.; auer gheloove, perverted belief, superstition; auer-hands, ouer-hands (as Sw. afwig-hand), manu aversâ, praeposterâ; aver-recht, over-recht, contrarius recto, praeposterus, sinister; auwiis, auer-wiis, foolish, mad.
The different G. forms are very numerous; OHG. abuh, abag, aversus, perversus, sinister ; G. dial. abich, abech, äbicht, übechig, awech, awechi (alles thut er awechi, he does everything awkly), affig, affik, aft, aftik, and again ebsch, äpisch, episch, verkehrt, linkisch, link, and in Netherlandish, aves, aefs, obliquus ; aafsch, aefsch, aafschelyk, aversus, pre-posterus, contrarius.—Kil.
Awl. ON. alr ; G. ahle, OHG. alansa, alasna, Du. else, Fr. alesne. It. lesina.
Awn. A scale or husk of anything, the beard of corn. ON. ogn, agnir, chaff, straw, mote ; Dan. avne ; Gr. ἄχνη, Esthon. aggan, chaff.
* Awning. Awning (sea term), a sail or tarpaulin hung over any part of a ship. Traced by the Rev. J. Davies to the Pl. D. havenung, from haven, a place where one is sheltered from wind and rain, shelter, as in the lee of a building or bush. But it should be observed that havenung is not used in the sense of awning, and it is more probable that it is identical with Fr. auvent. Mid. Lat. auvanna, a penthouse of cloth before a shop-window, &c.—Cot.
Axe. AS. acse, eax, Goth. aqizi, MHG. aches, G. ackes, ax, axt, ON. öxi, Gr. ἀξίνη, Lat. ascia for ascia.
Axiom. Gr. ἀξίωμα, a proposition, maxim, from ἀξιόω, to consider worthy, to postulate.
Axle. Lat. axis, Gr. ἄξων, the centre on which a wheel turns or drives. Gr. ἄγω, Lat. ago, to urge forwards.
Aye is used in two senses : 1. Ever, always, as in the expression for ever and aye ; and 2. As an affirmative particle, synonymous with yea and yes.

The primitive image seems to consist in the notion of continuance, duration, expressed in Goth. by the root aiv. Aivs, time, age, the world ; us-aivjan, to outlast ; du aiva in aivin, for ever ; ni in aiva, niaiv, never. Lat. ævum, æ-tas ; Gr. αἰεί, ἀεί, always ; αἰών, an age. OHG. io, io ; G. je, ever, always ; AS. æva, a ; OSwed. œ, all, ever.
The passage from the notion of continuance, endurance, to that of asseveration, may be exemplified by the use of the G. je, ja; je und je, for ever and ever ; von je her, from all time ; wer hat es je gesehen, who has ever seen it. Das ist je wahr, that is certainly true ; es ist je nicht recht, it is certainly not right ; es kann ja einen irren, every one may be mistaken ; thut es doch ja nicht, by no means do it. In the same way the Italian gia; non gia, certainly not. From this use of the word to imply the unbroken and universal application of a proposition, it became adopted to stand by itself as an affirmative answer, equivalent to, certainly, even so, just so. In like manner the Lat. etiam had the force of certainly, yes indeed, yes.
In Frisian, as in English, are two forms, æ, like aye, coming nearer to the original root aiv, and ea, corresponding to G. je, ja, AS. gea, E. yea. In yes we have the remains of an affix, se or si, which in AS. was also added to the negative, giving nese, no, as well as jese, yes.
Azure. It. azzurro, azzuolo; Sp. Port. azul. From Pers. lazur, whence lapis lazuli, the sapphire of the ancients.—Diez.

To Babble. Fr. babiller, Du. babelen, bebelen, confundere verba, blaterare, garrire ; Gr. βαβάζειν.—Kil. From the syllables ba, ba, representing the movement of the lips, with the element el or l representing continuation or action. Fris. bäbeln or böbbeln is when children make a noise with their lips by sounding the voice and jerking down the underlip with the finger.—Outzen. The Tower of Babel was the tower of babblement, of confused speech.
On the same principle a verb of the same meaning with babble was formed on the syllable ma.
And sat softly adown And seid my byleve And so I bablede on my bedes, They broughte me aslepe— On this matere I might Mamelen full long.—P. P.
See Baboon.
Babe. The simplest articulations, and those which are readiest caught by the infant mouth, are the syllables formed by the vowel a with the primary consonants of the labial and dental classes, especially the former ; ma, ba, pa, na, da, ta. Out of these, therefore, is very generally formed the limited vocabulary required at the earliest period of infant life, comcomprising the names for father, mother, infant, breast, food. Thus in the nursery-language of the Norman English papa, mamma, baba, are the father, mother, and infant respectively, the two latter of which pass into mammy and babby, baby, babe, while the last, with a nasal, forms the It. bambino.

In Saxon English father is dada, daddy, dad, answering to the Goth. atta, as papa to Hebrew abba.

Lat. mamma is applied to the breast, the name of which, in E. pap, Lat. papilla, agrees with the name for father.

Papa was in Latin the word with which infants demanded food, whence E. pap.

Baboon. The syllables ba, pa, naturally uttered in the opening of the lips, are used to signify as well the motion of the lips in talking or otherwise, as the lips themselves, especially large or movable lips, the lips of a beast.

Thus we have G. dial. babbeln, babbern, bappern (San-ders), bäberlen (Schmidt), to babble, talk much or imperfectly; E. baberlipped, having large lips; G. dial. bappe, Fris. babbe, Mantuan babbi, babbio, the chops, mouth, snout, lips; Fr. baboyer, babiner, to move or play with the lips, babine, the lip of a beast; babion, baboin. It. babbuino, a baboon, an animal with large ugly lips when compared with those of a man.

Bachelor. Apparently from a Celtic root. W. bachgen, a boy, bachgenes, a young girl, baches, a little darling, bachigyn, a very little thing, from bach, little.

From the foregoing we pass to the Fr. bacelle, bacelote, bachele, bachelette, a young girl, servant, apprentice; baceller, to make love, to serve as apprentice, to commence a study; bacelerie, youth; bachelage, apprenticeship, art and study of chivalry.

Hence by a secondary formation bacheler, bachelard, bachelier, young man, aspirant to knighthood, apprentice to arms or sciences.

A bachelor of arts is a young man admitted to the degree of apprentice or student of arts, but not yet a master.

In ordinary E. it has come to signify an unmarried man. Prov. bacalar, bachallier, was used of the young student, young soldier, young unmarried man.

Then, as in the case of many other words signifying boy or youth, it is applied to a servant or one in a subordinate condition.

Vos e mi'n fesetz per totz lauzar, Vos com senher e mi com bacalar: —you and I made ourselves praised among all, you as Lord, and I as servant or squire.

The functions of a knight were complete when he rode at the head of his retainers assembled under his banner, which was expressed by the term 'lever bannière.'

So long as he was unable to take this step, either from insufficient age or poverty, he would be considered only as an apprentice in chivalry, and was called a knight bachelor, just as the outer barrister was only an apprentice at the law, whatever his age might be.

The baccalarii of the south of France and north of Spain seem quite unconnected.

They were the tenants of a larger kind of farm, called baccalaria, were reckoned as rustici, and were bound to certain duty work for their lord.

There is no appearance in the passages cited of their having had any military character whatever.

One would suspect that the word might be of Basque origin.

Back, 1. ON. bak; Lith. pakaldà. The part of the body opposite to the face, turned away from the face.

The root seems preserved in Bohem. páciti, to twist; Pol. paczyć se, to warp (of wood), to bend out of shape; wspak, wrong, backwards, inside outwards; pakosć, malice, spite, perversity; opak, the wrong way, awry, cross; opaczny, wrong, perverted; Russ. opako, naopako, wrong; paki in composition, equivalent to Lat. re, again; paki-buitie, regeneration.

So in E. to give a thing back is to give it again, to give it in the opposite direction to that in which it was formerly given, and with us too the word is frequently used in the moral sense of perverted, bad.

A back-friend is a perverted friend, one who does injury under the cover of friendship; to back-slide, to slide out of the right path, to fall into error; ON. bak-ráðugr, ill-counselled; Esthon. pahha-pool, the back side, wrong side; pahha, bad, ill-disposed; Fin. Lap. paha, bad; OHG. abah, abuh, apah, apuh, aversus, perversus, sinister; abahôn, aversari, abominari; Goth. ibuks, backwards.

Back, 2. A second meaning of Back is a brewer's vat, or large open tub for containing beer.

The word is widely spread in the sense of a wide open vessel.

Bret. bac, a boat; Pr. bac, a flat wide ferry boat; Du. back, a trough, bowl, manger, cistern, basin of a fountain, flat-bottomed boat, body of a wagon, pit at the theatre; Dan. bakke, a tray.

Of this the It. bacino is the diminutive, whence E. basin, bason; It. bacinetto, a bacinet, or bason-shaped helmet.

Backet. In the N. of E. a coal-hod, from back, in the sense of a wide open vessel ; Rouchi, bac à carbon.—Hécart. The Fr. baquet is a tub or pail.

Backgammon. From Dan. bakke (also bakke-bord), a tray, and gammen, a game, may doubtless be explained the game of Back-gammon, which is conspicuously a tray-game, a game played on a tray-shaped board, although the word does not actually appear in the Dan. dictionaries. It is exceedingly likely to have come down to us from our Northern ancestors, who devoted much of their long winter evenings to games of tables.

To make or leave a blot at Backgammon is to uncover one of your men, to leave it liable to be taken, an expression not explicable by the E. sense of the word blot. But the Sw. blott, Dan. blot, is naked, exposed ; blotte sig, to expose oneself ; Sw. göra blott, at Backgammon, to make an exposed point, to make a blot.

Bacon. OFr. bacon; bacquier, a sty-fed hog ; ODu. baecke, backe, a pig ; baecken-vleesch, baeck-vleesch, pork, bacon. The term seems properly to have been applied to a fatted hog and his flesh cured for keeping, ' porcus saginatus, ustulatus et salitus, at petaso aut perna.'—Duc. in v. Baco. The word may accordingly be derived from Bret. paska, to feed, W. pasg, feeding or fattening, pasg-dwrch, pasg-hwch, a fatted hog. The s is lost in Fr. pacage, pasture or feeding-ground, Mid.Lat. pacata, pagagium, pagnagium (Carp.), pannage or pawnage, duty paid for feeding animals, especially hogs, in the Lord's forests. On the other hand, there is a suspicious resemblance to Du. baggele, bigge, Ptg. bacoro, a young pig, Piedm. biga, a sow.

Bad. G. böse, Du. boos, malus, pravus, perversus, malignus. Pers. bud, bad. Unconnected, I believe, with Goth. bauths, tasteless, insipid.

Badge. A distinctive mark of office or service worn conspicuously on the dress, often the coat of arms of the principal under whom the person wearing the badge is placed. Du. busse, stadt-wapen, spinther, monile quod in humeris tabellarii et caduceatores ferunt.—Kil. Bage or bagge of armys—banidium.—Pr. Pm.

Perhaps the earliest introduction of a badge would be the red cross sewed on their shoulders by the crusaders as a token of their calling.

But on his breast a bloody cross he wore, The dear resemblance of his absent Lord, For whose sweet sake that glorious badge he wore.—F. Q.

BADGER Crucem assumere dicebantur (says Ducange) qui ad sacra bella profecturi Crucis symbolum palliis suis assuebant et affigebant in signum votivae illius expeditionis.—Franci audientes talia eloquia protinus in dextra fecere Cruces suere scapula.

The sign of the cross, then, was in the first instance, ' assumentum,' a patch, botch, or bodge ; boetsen, interpolare, ornare, ang. botche, bodge.—Kil. G. batz, batze, botzen, a dab or lump of something soft, a coarse patch — Sanders ; Bav. patschen, to strike with something flat, as the hand, to dabble or paddle in the wet. G. batzen, to dabble, to patch.—Sanders. The radical notion of patch, badge, will thus be something fastened on, as a dab of mud thrown against a wall and sticking there. Hence we find badged used by Shakespeare in the sense of dabbled. Their hands and faces were all badged with blood.—Macbeth.

The Sc. form baugie, however, does not well agree with the foregoing derivation. His schinyng scheild with his baugie (insigne) luke he.—D. V. 50. 13.

Badger. This word is used in two senses, apparently distinct, viz. in that of a corn-dealer, or carrier, one who bought up corn in the market for the purpose of selling it in other places ; and secondly, as the name of the quadruped so called. Now we have Fr. bladier, a corn-dealer (marchand de grain qui approvisionne les marchés à dos de mulets—Hécart), the diminutive of which (according to the analogy of bledier, blaier, belonging to corn, blairie, terre de blairie, corn country) would be blaireau, the actual designation of the quadruped badger in the same language, which would thus signify a little corn-dealer, in allusion doubtless to some of the habits of that animal, with which the spread of cultivation has made us little familiar.

But further, there can be little doubt that E. badger, whether in the sense of a corn-dealer or of the quadruped, is directly descended from the Fr. bladier, the corrupt pronunciation of which, in analogy with soldier, solger, sodger, would be bladger ; and though the omission of the l in such a case is a somewhat unfamiliar change, yet many instances may be given of synonyms differing only in the preservation (or insertion as the case may be) or omission of an l after an initial b or p. Thus Du. baffen and blaffen, to bark ; paveien and plaveien, to pave; pattijn and plattijn, a skait or patten ; butse and blutse, a bruise, boil ; E. botch, or blotch; baber-lipped, and blabber-lipped, having large ungainly lips ; fagged, tired, from flagged, Fr. bette and blette, beets ; Berri, batte de pluie, a pelting shower of rain, Sc. a blad o'weet; Rouchi, basser, Fr. blasser, to foment.

To Baffle, 1. To baffle, to foil or render ineffectual the efforts of another, must be distinguished from Fr. bafouer, OE. bafful, to treat ignominiously. Baffle, in the former sense, is one of a series of similar forms, baffle, faffle, haffle, maffle, famble, signifying in the first instance imperfect speaking, stammering, then imperfect action of other kinds, trifling, doing something without settled purpose or decisive effect. We may cite, faffle, to stutter, stammer, to fumble, saunter, trifle ; haffle, to stammer, falter ; maffle, to stammer, to mumble ; the term seems to be applied to any action suffering from impediments.—Hal. To baffle, to speak thick and inarticulately, to handle clumsily.—Forby. Swiss baffeln, maffeln, to chatter, talk idly ; Rouchi baflier, to slobber, stammer, talk idly.

We pass from the notion of imperfect speech to that of imperfect, ineffectual action, when we speak of light baffling winds, changeable winds not serving the purpose of navigation. ' For hours previously the ill-fated ship was seen baffling with a gale from the N.W.:' i. e. struggling ineffectually with it.—Times, Feb. 27, 1860. ' To what purpose can it be to juggle and baffle for a time :' to trifle.—Barrow.

Finally, in a factitive sense, it signifies to cause another to act in an ineffectual manner, to foil his efforts. To baffle, to stammer, to change, to vary, to prevent any one from doing a thing.—Hal. So to habble, to stammer, to speak confusedly, and, in a factitive sense, to reduce to a state of perplexity. To be hobbled, to be perplexed or nonplussed, foiled in any undertaking.—Jam. Sup.

2. OE. bafful, Fr. bafouer, to hoodwink, deceive, baffle, disgrace, handle basely in terms, give reproachful words unto.—Cot. The Fr. verb may be actually borrowed from the E. bafful, which seems to have been applied to a definite mode of disgracing a man, indicated by Hall as in use among the Scots.

And furthermore the erle bad the herauld to say to his master, that if he for his part kept not his appointment, then he was content that the Scots should bafful him, which is a great reproach among the Scots, and is used when a man is openly perjured, and then they make of him an image painted reversed with the heels upward, with his name, wondering, crying and blowing out of him with horns in the most despiteful manner they can. In token that he is to be exiled the company of all good creatures.

Again, in the F. Q. First he his beard did shave and foully shent. Then from him reft his shield, and it r'enverst And blotted out his arms with falshood blent. And himself baffuld, and his armes unherst, And broke his sword in twayn and all his armour sperst.

Now the Sc. has bauch, baugh, baach (ch guttural), repulsive to the taste, bad, sorry, ineffective. A bauch tradesman, a sorry tradesman; Without estate A youth, though sprung from kings, looks baugh and blate.—Ramsay in Jam. Beauty but bounty's but bauch. Beauty without goodness is good for nothing.

To bauchle, bachle, bashle, is then, to distort, to misuse ; to bauchle shoon, to tread them awry ; a bauchle, an old shoe, whatever is treated with contempt or derision. One who is set up as the butt of a company or a laughing-stock is said to be made a bauchle of; to bauchle, to treat contemptuously, to vilify.

Wallace lay still quhill forty dayis was gayn And fyve atour, bot perance saw he nayn Battaill till haiff, as thair promyss was maid He girt display again his baner braid ; Rapreiffyt Edward rycht gretlye of this thing, Bawchyllyt his seyll, blew out on that fals king As a tyrand ; turnd bak and tuk his gait.

If this passage be compared with the extract from Hall, it will be seen that the affront put by Wallace on the king's seal in token of his having broken his word, was an example of the practice which Hall tells us was used in Scotland under the name of baffulling, the guttural ch being represented in English by an f as in many other cases. The G. has bafel, bofel, pofel, synonymous with Sc. bauchle, spoiled goods, refuse, trash—Küttn. ; verbafeln, to make a bafel of, to bauchle.—Sanders.

Bag. Gael, bolg, balg, bag, a leather bag, wallet, scrip, the belly, a blister, bellows ; Goth. balgs, a skin, a leather case ; G. balg, the skin of an animal stripped off whole ; Brescian baga, entire skin of an animal for holding oil or wine ; the belly. See Belly, Bulge.

Baggage. Derived by Diez from Sp., Cat. baga, a noose, tie, knot, rope by which the load is fastened on a beast of burden. From baga was formed OFr. baguer, to truss or tuck up (Cot.), to tie to bind. 'Ils firent trousser et baguer leur trésor et richesses sur chevaulx et mules, chameaulx et dromadaires.' 'Après ce qu'ils eurent bagué leurs bagues.'—Gilion de Trasignie in Marsh. 'Pour veoir amener le Béarnois prisonnier en triomphe, lié et bagué.'—Satire Ménippée in Jaubert. From baguer was formed bagage, the carriage of an army, as it was called, the collective goods carried with an army, or the beasts which carry them. The resemblance to bagues, goods, valuables, is merely accidental, and as baggage is manifestly taken from the French it cannot be explained as signifying the collection of bags belonging to an army.

Bail.—Bailiff. The Lat. bajulus, a bearer, was applied in later times to a nurse, viz. as carrying the child about. Mid. Lat. bajula, It. balia. Next it was applied to the tutor or governor of the children, probably in the first instance to the foster-father.

Alii bajuli, i. e. servuli, vel nutritores—quia consueverint nutrire filios et familias dominorum.—Vitalis de Reb. Aragon. in Ducange.

When the child under the care of the Bajulus was of royal rank, the tutor became a man of great consequence, and the μέγας βαιούλος was one of the chief officers of state at Constantinople.

The name was also applied to the tutor of a woman or a minor. Thus the husband became the Bajulus uxoris, and the name was gradually extended to any one who took care of the rights or person of another. In this sense is to be understood the ordinary Eng. expression of giving bail, the person who gives bail being supposed to have the custody of him whom he bails. From bajulus was formed It. bailo, balivo (bajulivus); Fr. bail, bailli, E. bail, bailiff. The bail are persons who constitute themselves tutors of the person charged, and engage to produce him when required.

Tutores vel bajuli respondeant pro pupillis.—Usatici Barcinonenses. Et le roi l'a reçue en son hommage et le duc son baron comme bail d'elle.—Chron. Flandr. Et mitto illum (filium) et omnem meam terram et meum honorem et meos viros quæ Deus mihi dedit in bajulia de Deo et de suis Sanctis, &c. Ut sint in bajoliam Dei et de Sanctâ Maria, &c.—Testament. Regis Arragon. A. D. 1099, in Duc.

Fr. bailler, to hand over, is from bajulare, in the sense of making one a bail or keeper of the thing handed over, giving it into his bail or control.

Finally, every one to whom power was intrusted to execute not on his own behalf was called a bailiff, bajulius or balivus, from the regent of the empire (as we find in the case of Henry of Flanders : 'Principes, barones et milites exercitus mei imperii Ballivum elegerunt') to the humble bailiff in husbandry who has the care of a farm, or the officer who executes the writs of a sheriff.

Bail, 2. Bail is also used in the sense of post or bar. The bails were the advanced posts set up outside the solid defences of a town. Fr. baille, barrier, advanced gate of a city, palisade, barricade.—Roquefort. It is probably the same word as paling or pale. Fr. balises, finger-posts, posts stuck up in a river to mark the passage. Balle, barrière—Hécart. Bale, poste, retranchement; revenir à ses bales, to return to one's post, at the game of puss in the corner, or cricket. Hence the bails at cricket, properly the wickets themselves, but now the cross sticks at the top.

Bailiwick. The limits within which an executive officer has jurisdiction. Commonly explained as the district belonging to a bailiff, Fr. bailli. But the word can hardly be distinct from G. weichbild, Pl.D. wikbild, wikbolt, wicbilethe, the district over which the municipal law of a corporate town extended, or the municipal law itself. The word differs from E. bailiwick only in having its two elements compounded in opposite order. The element wick is generally recognised, as Goth. veihs, AS. wic, Lat. vicus, a town, but the meaning of bild remains obscure. Pl.D. wikmann, a burgher, citizen or councillor.—Brem. Wtb.

Bait. The senses may all be explained from the notion of biting. ON. beita, Sw. bet, bete, AS. bat (Ettmüller), a bait for fish, is what the fish bites at, or what causes him to bite. ON. beita, AS. bætan, to bait a hook. Du. bete, a bit, a mouthful. ON. bita, to bite, is specially applied to the grazing of cattle, whence beit, Sw. bet, bete, pasture, herbage; ON. beita, Sw. beta, to drive to pasture. In English the word is not confined to the food of cattle. Bait-poke, a bag to carry provisions in; bait, food, pasture.—Hal. Sw. beta, to bait on a journey, is to feed the horses, in accordance with Fr. repaître, to feed, to bait. ON. beita, Sw. beta, G. beitzen, to hunt with hawk or hare, must be understood as signifying to set on the hawk or hound to bite the prey. ON. beita einn hundum, to cause one to be worried by dogs, to set his dogs on one. To bait a bear or a bull is to set the dogs on to bite it. The ON. beita, Sw. beta, to harness oxen to a sledge, or horses to a carriage, must probably be explained from AS. bœte, N. bit, the bit of a bridle taken as the type of harness in general. Ongan tha his esolas batan: he then began to saddle his asses.—Caedm. p. 173. 25.
Baize. Coarse woollen cloth. Formerly bayes. Du. baey, baai, Fr. baye. 'Les bayes seront composées de bonne laine, non de flocon, laneton . . . ou autres mauvaises ordures.'—Reglement de la draperie in Hécait. According to this author it took its name from its yellow colour, given by 'graines d'Avignon;' from baie, berry.
To Bake. To dress or cook by dry heat; to cook in an oven. Bohem. pek, heat; peku, pécy, to bake, roast, &c.; pekar, a baker; Pol. piec, a stove; pieć, to bake, to roast, to parch, to burn; pieczywo, a batch, an oven-full; piekarz, a baker.
ON. baka, to warm. Kongur bakade sier vid elld, the King warmed himself at the fire.—Heimskr. E. dial, to beak, beke, to bask, to warm oneself; Du. zig baker-en, Pl.D. bäckern, to warm oneself. G. bähen, to heat; semmeln bähen, to toast bread; kranke glieder bähen, to foment a limb. Holz bähen, to heat wood, to heat wood for the purpose of making it set in a certain form. Gr. βω, calefacere. Lat. bajæ, warm baths. See Bath. The root is common to the Finnish class of languages. Lap. pak, paka, heat; paket, to melt with heat; pakestet, to be hot, to bask; paketet, to heat, make hot.
Balance. Lat. lanx, a dish, the scale of a balance; bilanx, the implement for weighing, composed of two dishes or scales hanging from a beam supported in the middle. It. bilancia, Sp. balanza, Prov. balans, balanza, Fr. balance. The change from i to a may be through the influence of the second a, or it may be from a false reference to the OFr. baler, baloier, Venet. balare, to move up and down, to see-saw.
Balcony. It. balco, balcone, an out-jutting corner of a house, by-window, bulk or stall of a shop; palco, palcone, palcora, any stage or scaffold, roof, floor, or ceiling; palcare, to plank, stage, scaffold.—Fl. The radical idea seems to be what is supported on balks or beams.
Bald. Formerly written balled, ballid, whence Richardson explains it as if it BALDERDASH signified made round and smooth like a ball. The root, however, is too widely spread for such an explanation. Finn. Esthon. paljas, naked, bare, bald; Lap. puoljas, bare of trees; Dan. bæidet, un-fledged.
Besides signifying void of hair, bald is used in the sense of having a white mark on the face, as in the case of the common sign of the bald-faced stag, to be compared with Fr. cheval belleface, a horse marked with white on its face. Bald-faced, white-faced.—Hal. The bald-coot is conspicuous by an excrescence of white skin above its beak.
The real identity of the word bald in the two senses is witnessed by a wide range of analogy. Pol. Bohem. łysy, bald, marked with a white streak; Pol. łysina, Bohem. łysyna, a bald pate, and also a white mark on the face. Du. blesse, a blaze on the forehead, a bare forehead, bles, bald.—Kil. Fin. paljas, bald, Gr. βαλιός, φαλιός, bald-faced, having a white streak on the face. Gael, ball, a spot or mark; Bret. bal, a white mark on an animal's face, or the animal itself, whence the common name Ball for a cart-horse in England. The connection seems to lie in the shining look of the bald skin.
His head was hallid and shone as any glass.—Chaucer.
Lith. ballas, white; balti, to become white; balsis, a white animal. Fin. pallaa, to burn; palo, burning. ON. bál, a blaze, beacon-fire, funereal pile.
Balderdash. Idle, senseless talk; to balder, to use coarse language.—Halli-well. w. baldorddi, to babble, prate, or talk idly. Du. balderen, to bawl, make an outcry, to roar, said of the roar of cannon, cry of an elephant, &c.; bold-eren, bulderen, blaterare, debacchari, minari.—Kil. ON. buldra, blaterare; Dan. buldre, to make a loud noise, as thunder, the rolling of a waggon, &c.; also to scold, to make a disturbance. N. baldra is used of noises of the same kind in a somewhat higher key. E. dial, to galder, to talk coarsely and noisily; to gulder, to speak with loud and dissonant voice.—Hal. Da. dial, bialder, foolish talk, nonsense; bialdre, to tattle. The final syllable seems to express a continuation of the phenomenon; Da. dial. dask, chatter, talk; döv-dask, chatter fit to deave one. Bav. datsch, noise of a blow with the open hand; dätschen, to clap, smack, tattle; Gael, ballart, noisy boast-ing, clamour; ballartaich, balardaich, a loud noise, shouting, hooting. The same termination in like manner expresses continuance of noise in plabartaich, a continued noise of waves gently beating on the shore, unintelligible talk; clapar-taich, a clapping or flapping of wings. From the same analogy, which causes so many words expressive of the plashing or motion of water to be applied to rapid or confused talking, balderdash is used to signify washy drink, weak liquor. A similar connection is seen in Sp. cha-puzar, to paddle in water; chapurrar, to speak gibberish; champurrar, to mix one liquid with another, to speak an unconnected medley of languages.

Bale. I. Grief, trouble, sorrow. AS. bealo, gen. bealwes, torment, destruction, wickedness; Goth. balva-vesei, wickedness; balveins, torment; ON. böl, calamity, misery; Du. bal-daed, malefactum, maleficium. Pol. bol, ache, pain; boleć, Bohem. boleti, to ail, to ache, to grieve; bolawy, sick, ill. W. ball, a plague, a pestilence. Perhaps ON. bola, a bubble, blister, a boil, may exhibit the original development of the signification, a boil or blain being taken as the type of sickness, pain, and evil in general. Russ. bolyat', to be ill, to grieve; bolyatchka, a pustule. See Gall, 3.

2. A package of goods. Sw. bal; It. balla; Fr. balle, bal, a ball or pack, i. e. goods packed up into a round or compact mass. ON. böllr, a ball; balla, to pack together in the form of a ball.

To Bale out water. Sw. balja, Dan. balle, Du. baalie, Bret. bal, Gael. ballan, a pail or tub; G. balge, a washing-tub, perhaps from balg, a skin, a water-skin being the earliest vessel for holding water. Hence Dan. balle, Du. baalien, to empty out water with a bowl or pail, to bale out. In like manner Fr. bacqueter, in the same sense, from bacquet, a pail.

* Balk. The primary sense seems to be as in G. balken, ON. bjálki, OSw. balker, bolker, Sw. bielke, Sw. dial. balk, a beam. Fr. bau, the beam of a ship, the breadth from side to side; Rouchi bau, a beam. We have then It. palcare, to plank, floor, roof, stage or scaffold; Sw. afbalka, to separate by beams, to partition off; Sw. dial. balk, a cross beam dividing the stalls in a cow-house, a wooden partition; ON. balkr, bólkr, a partition, whether of wood or stone, as in a barn or cow-house, a separate portion, a division of the old laws, a clump of men; veðra bálkr, N. uveirs bolk, as we say, a balk of foul weather. Sw. dial. balka, to heap; balka hopar, balka bunge, to heap up.

Twenty thousand men Balked in their blood on Holmedon's plain.

In the sense of a separation G. balken. Da. dial. balk, E. balk, are applied to a narrow slip of land left unturned in ploughing. Baulke of land, separaison.— Palsgr. A balk, says Ray, ' is a piece of land which is either casually overslipped and not turned up in plowing, or industriously left untouched by the plough for a boundary between lands.' Hence to balk is to pass over in ploughing, or figuratively in any other proceeding.

For so well no man halt the plough That it ne balketh other while, Ne so well can no man afile His tonge, that som time in jape Him may some light word overscape. Gower in R.

The mad steel about doth fiercely fly Not sparing wight, ne leaving any balke, But making way for death at large to walke. F. Q.

Da. dial. at giöre en balk, to omit a patch of land in sowing. To baulke the beaten road, to avoid it.— Sir H. Wotton.

In modern speech to balk is used in a factitive sense, to cause another to miss the object of his expectation.

Ball.—Balloon.—Ballot. ON. böllr (gen. ballar), a globe, ball, Sw. boll, ball. Da. bold, OHG. pallo, G. ball, It. balla (with the augm. ballone, a great ball, a balloon, and the dim. ballotta, a ballot), palla, Sp. bala, Fr. balle, Gr. πάλλα (Hesych.), a ball. Fin. pallo, with the dim. pallukka, pallikka, a ball, globule, testicle; maan pallikka, a clod of earth; palloilla, to roll. From the same root probably Lat. pila, pilula, a ball, a pill, which seem equally related to the foregoing and to the series indicated under Bowl, Boll.

Ball.—Ballad.—Ballet. It. ballare, to dance, from the more general notion of moving up and down. Mid.Lat. ballare, huc et illuc inclinare, vacillare.— Ugutio in Duc. Venet. balare, to rock, to see-saw. OFr. baler, baloier, to wave, to move, to stir. Job ne fut cokes (a kex or reed) ne rosiau Qui au vent se tourne et baloie. It. ballare, to shake or jog, to dance. Hence, ballo, a dance, a ball. Ballata, a dance, also a song sung in dancing (perhaps in the interval of dancing), a ballad. Fr. ballet, a scene acted in dancing, the ballet of the theatres.

It is probably an old Celtic word. Bret. baléa, to walk, balé, the act of walking, or movement of one who walks.
Ballast. Dan. bag-læst, Du. ballast, Fr. lest, lestage. It. lastra, Sp. lastre. The first syllable of this word has given a great deal of trouble. It is explained back by Adelung, because, as he says, the ballast is put in the hinder part of the ship. But the hold is never called the back of the ship. A more likely origin is to be found in Dan. dial. bag-læs, the back-load, or comparatively worthless load one brings back from a place with an empty waggon. When a ship discharges, if it fails to obtain a return cargo, it is forced to take in stones or sand, to preserve equilibrium. This is the back-load, or ballast of a ship, and hence the name has been extended to the addition of heavy materials placed at the bottom of an ordinary cargo to keep the balance.
The whole amount carried by the canal lines in 1854 was less than 25,000 tons, and this was chiefly carried as back-loading, for want of other freight.—Report Pennsylv. R. 1854.
Mr Marsh objects to the foregoing derivation, in the first place, that homeward-bound ships do not in general sail without cargo or in ballast, more frequently than outward-bound, and therefore that backloading is not an appropriate designation for the heavy material which is employed to steady sea-going vessels. But how appropriate the designation would really be, may be judged by the following illustration from practical life. ' The object of the company is to provide the excellent ore of the southern counties as a return cargo for the colliers of the North. By this means the colliers will ensure an additional profit by carrying a ballast for which they will receive some freightage.'— Mining Journal, Sept. 1, 1860.
And Kil. explains ballast, inutilis sarcina, inutile onus, a useless load.
A more serious objection is that the word in earlier Danish is always barlast, as it still is in Sweden and Norway. But because baglast is not found in the written documents, it by no means follows that it was not always locally current. And it is certain that barlast could never have passed into baglast by mere corruption, while it would be an easy transition from baglast through ballast to barlast.
Mr Marsh even calls in question whether the last syllable is the Du. last, a load. But Fr. lester is to load a ship as well as to ballast it.—Cotgr. Lest, like Teutonic last, was used for a load or definite weight of goods (Roquef.), and Mid. Lat. lastagium signified not only ballast, but loadage, a duty on goods sold in the markets, paid for the right of carriage.
Balluster. Fr. ballustres, ballisters (corruptly bannisters when placed as guard to a staircase), little round and short pillars, ranked on the outside of cloisters, terraces, galleries, &c.—Cotgr. Said to be from balaustia, the flower of the pomegranate, the calyx of which has a double curvature similar to that in which balusters are commonly made. But such rows of small pillars were doubtless in use before that particular form was given to them. The Sp. barauste, from bara or vara, a rod, seems the original form of the word, of which balaustre (and thence the Fr. ballustre) is a corruption, analogous to what is seen in It. bertesca, baltresca, a battlement ; Lat. urtica, Venet. oltriga, a nettle.
Sp. baranda, railing around altars, fonts, balconies, &c. ; barandado, series of balusters, balustrade ; barandilla, a small balustrade, small railing.
Balm, Balsam. Fr. baume, from Lat. balsamum, Gr. βάλσαμον, a fragrant gum.
Baltic. The Baltic sea, mare Balticum. In OSw. called Bælt, as two of the entrances are still called the Great and Little Belt. The authorities are not agreed as to the grounds on which the name is given.
To Bam. To make fun of a person. A bam, a false tale or jeer. Bret. bamein, to enchant, deceive, endormir par des contes. Bamour, enchanter, sorcerer, deceiver.
To Bamboozle.—To deceive, make fun of a person. There are a set of fellows they call banterers and bamboozlers that play such tricks.—Arbuthnot in R.
It. bambolo, bamboccio, bambocciolo, a young babe, by met. an old dotard or babish gull ; imbambolare, to blear or dim one's sight, also with flatteries and blandishments to enveagle and make a child of one.—Fl. If bambocciolare were ever used in the same sense it might have given rise to bamboozle.
Sc. bumbazed, puzzled, astonished.
To Ban. To proclaim, command, forbid, denounce, curse. The primitive meaning of the word seems to have been to summon to the army. In the commencement of the

In feudal times all male inhabitants were in general required to give personal attend-ance when the king planted his banner in the field, and sent round a notice that his subjects were summoned to join him against the enemy.

He askyt of the Kyng Til have the vaward of his batayl, Quhatever thai ware wald it assayle, That he and his suld have always Quhen that the king suld Banare rays.
Wyntoun, v. 19. 15.

Now this calling out of the public force was called bannire in hostem, bannire in exercitum, populum, in hostem convocare, bannire exercitum, in Fr. banir l'oust; AS. theodscipe ut abannan. In Layamon we constantly find the expression, he bannede his ferde, he assembled his host. The expression seems to arise from bann in the sense of standard, flag, ensign (see Banner). The raising of the King's banner marked the place of assembly, and the primitive meaning of bannire was to call the people to the bann or standard. The term was then applied to summoning on any other public oc-casion, and thence to any proclamation, whether by way of injunction or for-biddal.

Si quis legibus in utilitatem Regis sive in hoste (to the host or army) sive in reliquam utilitatem bannitus fuerit, etc.—Leg. Ripuar. Exercitum in auxilium Sisenardi de toto regno Burgundiæ bannire praecepit Fredegarius.—Si quis cum armis bannitus fuerit et non venerit.—Capitul. Car. Mag. A. D. 813. Se il avenist que le Roy chevauchat à ost banni contre les ennemis de la Croix.—Assises de Jerusalem. Fece bandire oste generale per tutto il regno.—John Villani in Duc.

In like manner we find bannire ad placita, admolendinum, &c., summoning to serve at the Lord's courts, to bring corn to be ground at his mill, &c. Thus the word acquired the sense of proclamation, ex-tant in Sp. and It. bando, and in E. banns of marriage. In a special sense the term was applied to the public denunciation by ecclesiastical authority; Sw. bann, excommunication; bann-lysa, to excom-municate (lysa, to publish); banna, to reprove, to take one to task, to chide, to curse, E. to ban.

In Fr. bandon the signification was somewhat further developed, passing on from proclamation to command, permis-sion, power, authority. A son bandon, at his own discretion. OE. bandon was used in the same sense. See Abandon.

Oncques Pucelle de paraige N'eut d'aimer tel bandon que j'ai, Car j'ai de mon père congié De faire ami et d'être aimé.—R. R.

Never maiden of high birth had such power or freedom of loving as I have.

Les saiges avoit et les fols Communément à son bandon.—R. R.

Translated by Chaucer, Great loos hath Largesse and great prise, For both the wise folk and unwise Were wholly to her bandon brought, i.e. were brought under her power or command.

Band, 1. That with which anything is bound. AS. band, Goth. bandi, Fr. bande, It. banda. From the verb to bind, Goth. bindan, band, bundun. Spe-cially applied to a narrow strip of cloth or similar material for binding or swath-ing; hence a stripe or streak of different colour or material. In It. banda the term is applied to the strip of anything lying on the edge or shore, a coast, side, region. G. bande, border, margin.

Band, 2.—To Bandy. In the next place Band is applied to a troop of soldiers, a number of persons associated for some common purpose. It. Sp. banda, Fr. bande. There is some doubt how this signification has arisen. It seems however to have been developed in the Romance languages, and cannot be ex-plained simply as a body of persons bound together for a certain end. It has plausibly been deduced from Mid.Lat. bannum or bandum, the standard or banner which forms the rallying point of a company of soldiers.

Bandus, says Muratori, Diss. 26, tunc (in the 9th century) nuncupabatur legio a bando, hoc est vexillo.

So in Swiss, fahne, a company, from fahne, the ensign or banner. Sp. bandera is also used in both senses. Fr. enseigne, the colours under which a band or com-pany of footmen serve, also the band or company itself.—Cot. But if this were the true derivation it would be a singular change to the feminine gender in banda. The real course of development I believe to be as seen in Sp. banda, side, then party, faction, those who side together (bande, parti, ligue—Taboada). Bandear, to form parties, to unite with a band. It. bandare, to side or to bandy (Florio), to bandy being explained in the other part of the dictionary, to follow a faction.

To bandy, tener da alcuno, sostener il partito d'alcuno.—Torriano.

Unnumbered as the sands Of Barca or Cyrene's torrid soil,

Levied to side with warring winds, and poise Their lighter wings.—Milton in R.
Kings had need beware how they side themselves, and make themselves as of a faction or party, for leagues within the state are ever pernicious to monarchy.—Bacon in R.
Fr. bander, to join in league with others against—Cotgr., se reunir, s'associer, se joindre.—Roquefort. It is in this sense that the word is used by Romeo.
Draw, Benvolio, beat down their weapons: Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage, Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath Forbidden bandying in Verona streets.
The prince had forbidden faction fighting. Sp. bandear, to cabal, to foment factions, follow a party.
The name of bandy is given in English to a game in which the players are divided into two sides, each of which tries to drive a wooden ball with bent sticks in opposite directions.
The zodiac is the line: the shooting stars. Which in an eye-bright evening seem to fall. Are nothing but the balls they lose at bandy.
Brewer, Lingua, in R.
Fr. bander, to drive the ball from side to side at tennis. Hence the expression of bandying words, retorting in language like players sending the ball from side to side at bandy or tennis.
Banditti. See Banish.
Bandog. A large dog kept for a guard, and therefore tied up, q. band-dog. Du. band-hond, canis vinculis assuetus, et canis pecuarius, pastoralis.—Kil.
To Bandy. See Band, 2.
Bandy. Bandy legs are crooked legs. Fr. bander un arc, to bend a bow, &c. ; bandé, bent as a bow.
Bane. Goth. banja, a blow, a wound; OHG. bana, death-blow; Mid.HG. bane, destruction; AS. bana, murderer. ON. bana, to slay, bana-sott, death-sickness, bana-sár, death-wound, &c.
Bang. A syllable used to represent a loud dull sound, as of an explosion or a blow. The child cries bang! fire, when he wishes to represent letting off a gun. To bang the door is to shut it with a loud noise.
With many a stiff thwack, many a bang, Hard crabtree and old iron rang.—Hudibras.
ON. bang, hammering, beating, disturbance; banga, to beat, knock, to work in wood. Sw. bång, stir, tumult; bångas, to make a stir; banka, to knock, Dan. banke, to knock, beat, rap; banke et søm i, to hammer in a nail. The Susu, a language of W. Africa, has bang-bang, to drive in a nail.

To Banish.—Bandit. From Mid. Lat. bannire, bandire, to proclaim, denounce, was formed the OFr. compound forbannir (bannire foras), to publicly order one out of the realm, and the simple bannir was used in the same sense, whence E. banish.
From the same verb the It. participle bandito signifies one denounced or proclaimed, put under the ban of the law, and hence, in the same way that E. outlaw came to signify a robber, It. banditti acquired the like signification. Forbannitus is used in the Leg. Ripuar. in the sense of a pirate.—Diez. The word is in E. so much associated with the notion of a band of robbers, that we are inclined to understand it as signifying persons banded together.
Banister. See Baluster.
Bank.—Bench. The latter form has come to us from AS. banc, the former from Fr. banc, a bench, bank, seat; banc de sable, a sand-bank. G. bank, a bench, stool, shoal, bank of river. Bantze, a desk.—Vocab. de Vaud. It. banco, panca, a bench, a table, a counter.
But natheless I took unto our dame Your wife at home the same gold again Upon your bench—she wot it well certain By certain tokens that I can here tell.
Shipman's Tale.
From a desk or counter the signification was extended to a merchant's counting-house or place of business, whence the mod. E. Bank applied to the place of business of a dealer in money. The ON. distinguishes bekkr, N. benk, a bench, a long raised seat, and bakki, a bank, eminence, bank of a river, bank of clouds, back of a knife. Dan. bakke, banke, bank, eminence. The back is a natural type of an elevation or raised object. Thus Lat. dorsum was applied to a sand-bank; dorsum jugi, the slope of a hill, a rising bank. The ridge of a hill is AS. hrycg, the back.
Bankrupt. Fr. banqueroute, bankruptcy, from banc, bench, counter, in the sense of place of business, and OFr. roupt, Lat. ruptus, broken. When a man fails to meet his engagements his business is broken up and his goods distributed among his creditors. It. banca rotta, banca fallita, a bankrupt merchant.—Fl.
Banner. The word Ban or Band was used by the Lombards in the sense of banner, standard.
Vexillum quod Bandum appellant. — Paulus Diaconus in Duc.

In the same place is quoted from the Scholast on Gregory Nazianzen ; Τὰ καλούμενα παρὰ Ῥωμαίους αἴγνα καὶ βάνδα ταῦτα ὁ Ἀττικίζων συνθήματα καὶ ση- μῆμα καλεῖ.
Hence It. bandiera, Fr. bannière, E. banner.
The origin is in all probability Goth. bandvo, bandva, a sign, token, an intima- tion made by bending the head or hand.
ON. benda, to bend, to beckon ; banda, to make signs ; banda hendi, manu an- nuere.
The original object of a standard is to serve as a mark or sign for the troop to rally round, and it was accord- ingly very generally known by a name having that signification.
ON. merki, Lat. signum, Gr. σημεῖον, OHG. heri-pauchan, a war-beacon or war-signal; Fr. enseigne, a sign or token as well as an ensign or banner ; Prov. senh, senhal, a sign ; senhal, senheirа, banner.
According to Diez the It. bandiera is derived from banda, a band or strip of cloth, and he would seem to derive Goth. bandva, a sign, from the same source, the ensign of a troop being taken as type of a sign in general, which is surely in direct opposition to the natural order of the signification.
Besides it must be by no means assumed that the earliest kind of ensign would be a flag or streamer.
It is quite as likely that a sculptured symbol, such as the Roman Eagle, would first be taken for that purpose.
Banneret. Fr. banneret. A knight banneret was a higher class of knights, inferior to a baron, privileged to raise their own banner in the field, either in virtue of the number of their retinue, or from having distinguished themselves in battle.
Qui tantæ erant nobilitatis ut eorum quilibet vexilli gauderet insignibus.—Life of Philip Au- gust, in Duc.
They were called in the Latin of the period vexillarii, milites bannarii, banne- rarii, bannereti.

Banquet. It. banchetto, dim. of banco, a bench or table ; hence a repast, a ban- quet.
To Banter. To mock or jeer one.
When wit hath any mixture of raillery, it is but calling it banter, and the work is done. This polite word of theirs was first borrowed from the bullies in White Friars, then fell among the foot- men, and at last retired to the pedants—but if this bantering, as they call it, be so despicable a thing, &c.—Swift in R.

Bantling. A child in swaddling clothes, from the bands in which it is wrapped.
So ON. reiflingr, a bantling, from reifa, to wrap. In a similar manner are formed yearling, an animal a year old, nestling, a young bird still in the nest, &c.

Baptise. Gr. βάπτω, βαπτίζω, to dip, to wash.

Bar. A rod of any rigid substance.
It. barra, Fr. barre, and with an initial s, It. sbarra, OHG. sparro, Sw. sparre, E. spar, a beam or long pole of wood.
The meaning seems in the first instance a branch; Celtic bar, summit, top, then branches.
Bret. barrou-gwez, branches of a tree (gwezen, a tree). Gael. barrac, branches, brushwood.
Hence Fr. barrer, to bar or stop the way as with a bar, to hinder; barrière, a barrier or stoppage; barreau, the bar at which a criminal appears in a court of justice, and from which the barrister addresses the court.

Barb. 1. The barb of an arrow is the beard-like jag on the head of an arrow directed backwards for the purpose of hindering the weapon from being drawn out of a wound.
Lat. barba, Fr. barbe, a beard. Flesche barbelée, a bearded or barbed arrow.—Cot.
2. Fr. Barbe, E. Barb, also signified a Barbary horse. G. Barbar, OFr. Barbare.—Leduchat.
3. The term barb was also applied to the trappings of a horse, probably cor- rupted from Fr. barde, as no correspond- ing term appears in other languages.
Bardé, barbed or trapped as a great horse.—Cot.

Barbarous. The original import of the Gr. βάρβαρος, Lat. barbarus, is to designate one whose language we do not understand.
Thus Ovid, speaking of himself in Pontus, says, Barbaras hic ego sum quia non intelligor ulli.
Gr. Βαρβαρόφωνος, speaking a foreign language.
Then as the Greeks and Romans attained a higher pitch of civil- isation than the rest of the ancient world, the word came to signify rude, uncivilised, cruel.
The origin of the word is an imitation of the confused sound of voices by a repetition of the syllable bar, bar, in the same way in which the broken sound of waves, of wind, and even of voices is represented by a repetition of the analogous syllable mur, mur.
We speak of the murmur of the waves, or of a crowd of people talking.
It may be remarked, indeed, that the noise of voices is constantly represented by the same word as the sound made by the movement of water. Thus the ON. skola, as well as thwætta, are each used in the sense both of washing or splashing and of talking. The E. twattle, which was formerly used in the sense of tattle, as well as the modern twaddle, to talk much and foolishly, seem frequentative forms of Sw. twætta, to wash. G. waschen, to tattle. It. guazzare, to plash or dabble, guazzolare, to prattle.—Fl. In like manner the syllable bar or bor is used in the formation of words intended to represent the sound made by the movement of water or the indistinct noise of talking. Hindost. barbar, muttering, barbar-kama, to gurgle. The verb borrelen signifies in Du. to bubble or spring up, and in Flanders to vociferate, to make an outcry; Sp. borbotar, borbollar, to boil or bubble up; barbulla, a tumultuous assembly; Port. borbulhar, to bubble or boil; It. borboglio, a rumbling, uproar, quarrel; barbugliare, to stammer, stutter, speak confusedly. Fr. barbeter, to grunt, mutter, murmur; barboter, to mumble or mutter words, also to wallow like a seething pot.—Cot. The syllable bur seems in the same way to be taken as the representative of sound conveying no meaning, in Fr. baragouin, gibberish, jargon, 'any rude gibble-gabble or barbarous speech.'—Cot. Mod. Gr. βερβερίζω, to stammer; βορβορίζω, to rumble, boil, grumble (Lowndes, Mod. Gr. Lex.); Port. borborinha, a shouting of men.

Barbel. A river fish having a beard at the corners of the mouth. Fr. barbel, barbeau.—Cot.
Barber. Fr. barbier, one who dresses the beard.
Barberry. A shrub bearing acid berries. Fr. dial. barbelin.—Dict. Etym. Barbaryn-frute, barbeum, —tree, barbaris.—Pr. Pm.
Barbican. An outwork for the defence of a gate. It. barbacane, a jetty or outwork in a building, loophole in a wall to shoot out at, scouthouse.—Fl. The Pers. bála-khaneh, upper chamber, is the name given to an open chamber over the entrance to a caravanserai.—Rich. Hence it is not unlikely that the name may have been transferred by returned crusaders to the barbican or scouthouse over a castle gate from whence arrivals might be inspected and the entrance defended.
Bard. Ir. W. bardd, Bret. barz, the name of the poets of the ancient Celts, whose office it was to sing the praises of the great and warlike, and hymns to the gods.
Bardus Gallica cantator appellatur qui virorum fortium laudes canit.—Festus in Dict. Etym.
Βάρδοι μὲν ὑμνηταὶ καὶ ποιηταί.—Strabo, Ib.
Et Bardi quidem fortia virorum illustrium facta heroicis composita versibus cum dulcibus lyræ modulis cantitarunt.—Lucan, Ib.
Hence, in poetic language Bard is used for poet.
2. Sp. barda, horse armour covering the front, back, and flanks. Applied in E. also to the ornamental trappings of horses on occasions of state.
When immediately on the other part came in the fore eight knights ready armed, their basses and bards of their horses green satin embroidered with fresh devices of bramble bushes of fine gold curiously wrought, powdered all over.—Hall in R.
Fr. bardes, barbes or trappings for horses of service or of show. Barder, to barbe or trap horses, also to bind or tie across. Barde, a long saddle for an ass or mule, made only of coarse canvas stuffed with flocks. Bardeau, a shingle or small board, such as houses are covered with. Bardelle, a bardelle, the quilted or canvas saddle wherewith colts are backed.—Cotgr. Sp. barda, coping of straw or brushwood for the protection of a mud wall; albarda, a pack-saddle, broad slice of bacon with which fowls are covered when they are roasted; albardilla, small pack-saddle, coping, border of a garden bed. The general notion seems that of a covering or protection, and if the word be from a Gothic source we should refer it to ON. barð, brim, skirt, border, ala, axilla. Hatt-barð, the flap of a hat; skialldar-barð, the edge of a shield; hval-barð, the layers of whalebone that hang from the roof of a whale's mouth. But Sp. albarda looks like an Arabic derivation; Arab. al-barda'ah, saddle-cloth.—Diez.
Bare. Exposed to view, open, uncovered, unqualified. G. baar, bar, ON. ber; G. baares geld, ready money. Russ. bos, Lith. basas, basus, bare; baskojis, barefooted; Sanscr. bhasad, the nakedness of a woman.
Bargain. OFr. barguigner, to chaffer, bargain, or more properly (says Cotgr.) to wrangle, haggle, brabble in the making of a bargain. The radical idea is the confused sound of wrangling, and the word was used in OE. and Sc. in the sense of fight, skirmish.
And mony tymys ische thai wald And bargane at the barraiss hald,

And wound thair fayis oft and sla. Barbour in Jam.
We have seen under Barbarous that the syllable bar was used in the construction of words expressing the confused noise of voices sounding indistinct either from the language not being understood, or from distance or simultaneous utterance. Hence it has acquired the character of a root signifying confusion, contest, dispute, giving rise to It. baruffa, fray, altercation, dispute; Prov. baralha, trouble, dispute; Port. baralhar, Sp. barajar, to shuffle, entangle, put to confusion, dispute, quarrel; Port. barafunda, Sp. barahunda, tumult, confusion, disorder; Port. barafustar, to strive, struggle; It. baratta, strife, squabble, dispute; barattare, to rout, to cheat, also to exchange, to chop; E. barretor, one who stirs up strife. Nor is the root confined to the Romance tongues; Lith. barti, to scold; barnis, strife, quarrel; ON. baratta, strife, contest; bardagi, battle.
From Fr. baragouin, representing the confused sound of people speaking a language not understood by the hearer, we pass to the verb barguigner, to wrangle, chaffer, bargain.
Barge.—Bark, 1. These words seem mere varieties of pronunciation of a term common to all the Romance as well as Teutonic and Scandinavian tongues. Prov. barca, barja, OFr. barge, Du. barsie, OSw. barsj, a boat belonging to a larger ship.
Barca est quæ cuncta navis commercia ad littus portat.—Isidore in Rayn. Naus en mar quant a perdu sa barja.—Ibid. Sigurdr let taka tua skip-bata er barker ero kalladir.—Ihre.
The origin may be ON. barki, the throat, then the bows or prow of a ship, pectus navis, and hence probably (by a metaphor, as in the case of Lat. puppis) barkr came to be applied to the entire ship. So also ON. kani, a beak, prominent part of a thing, also a boat; skutr, the fore or after end of a boat; skuta, a boat.
Bark, 2. The outer rind of a tree; any hard crust growing over anything. ON. börkr, bark; at barka, to skin over; barkandi, astringent.
To Bark. AS. beorcan, from an imitation of the sound.
Barley. The Goth. adj. barizeins indicates a noun baris, barley; AS. bere. W. barlys (bara, bread, and llysiaw, Bret. louzou, lézen, herbs, plants), bread-corn, barley. The older form in E. was barlic, barlig, barlich, the second syllable of which is analogous to that of garlick, hemlock, charlock, and is probably a true equivalent of the lys in W. barlys. See Garlick.
Barm. 1. Yeast, the slimy substance formed in the brewing of beer. AS. beorm, G. berm, Sw. berma. Dan. bærme, the dregs of oil, wine, beer.
2. As Goth. barms, a lap, bosom; ON. barmr, border, edge, lap, bosom. See Brim.
Barn. AS. berern, bærn, commonly explained from bere, barley, and ern, a place, a receptacle for barley or corn, as baces-ern, a baking place or oven, lihtes-ern, a lantern. (Ihre, v. arm.) But probably berern is merely a misspelling, and the word is simply the Bret. bern, a heap. Acervus, bern.—Gl. Cornub. Zeuss. So ON. hladi, a heap, a stack, hlaða, a barn. Du. baerm, berm, a heap; berm hoys, meta fœni.—Kil. Swab. baarn, barn, hay-loft, corn-shed, barn. Dan. dial. baaring, baaren, baarm, a load, so much as a man can bear or carry at once. On the other hand, MHG. barn, the rack or manger, præsepe; houbartij, fœnile.
Barnacle. A conical shell fixed to the rocks within the wash of the tide. Named from the cap-like shape of the shell. Manx bayrn, a cap; barnagh, a limpet, a shell of the same conical shape with barnacles. Gael. bairneach, barnacles, limpets; W. brenig, limpets.
* Barnacles. Spectacles, also irons put on the noses of horses to make them stand quiet.—Bailey. Of these meanings the second is probably the original, the name being given to spectacles, which were made to hold on the nose by a spring, from comparison to a farrier's barnacles. The name of barnacles is given by Joinville to a species of torture by compression practised by the Saracens, and may therefore be an Eastern word. Camus, bernac.—Vocab. in Nat. Antiq. Berniques, spectacles.—Vocab. de Berri.
Baron. It. barone, Sp. varon, Prov. bar (acc. baron), OFr. ber (acc. baron), Fr. baron. Originally man, husband, then honoured man.
Lo bar non es creat per la femna mas la femna per lo barô. The man was not created for the woman, but the woman for the man.—Rayn.—Tam baronem quam feminam.—Leg. Ripuar.—Barum vel feminam.—Leg. Alam.
In the Salic Law it signifies free born; in the capitularies of Charles the Bald

Barones are the nobles or vassals of the crown.
Baro, gravis et authenticus vir.—John de Gar-landiâ.
In our own law it was used for married man, Baron and femme, man and wife.
We have not much light on the pre- cise formation of the word, which would seem to be radically the same with Lat. vir, Goth. vair, AS. wer, W. gwr, Gael. fear, a man.

Baronet. The feudal tenants next below the degree of a baron were called baronetti, baronuli, baronculi, baroncelli, but as the same class of tenants were also termed bannerets, the two names, from their resemblance, were sometimes confounded, and in several instances, where baronetti is written in the printed copies, Spelman found bannereti in the MS. rolls of Parliament. Still he shows conclusively, by early examples, that baronettus is not a mere corruption of banneretus, but was used in the sense of a lesser Baron.
Baronculus—a baronet.—Nominale of the 15th Cent. in Nat. Antiq.
It was not until the time of James I. that the baronets were established as a formal order in the state.

Barrack. Fr. barague. It. baracca, Sp. barraca, a hut, booth, shed. The Sp. word is explained by Minshew 'a souldiers tent or booth or suchlike thing made of the sail of a ship or suchlike stuff. Dicitur proprie casa illa piscatorum juxta mare.'
The original signification was probably a hut made of the branches of trees. Gael. barrach, brushwood, branches; barrachad, a hut or booth. Bargus or barcus in the Salic laws is the branch of a tree to which a man is hanged.
Before the gates of Bari he lodged in a miser- able hut or barrack, composed of dry branches and thatched with straw.—Gibbon.
It should be observed that, whenever soldiers' barracks are mentioned, the word is always used in the plural number, pointing to a time when the soldiers' lodgings were a collection of huts.

* Barragan. Sp. baragan, Fr. bara- gant, bouracan, a kind of coarse camlet.
A passage cited by Marsh from the Amante Liberal of Cervantes implies that barragans were of Moorish manu- facture, and Arabic barkan or barankan is the name of a coarse, black woollen garment still used in Morocco.
La mercancia del baxel era de barraganes y alquiceles y de otras cosas que de Berberia se elevaban a Levante.
On the other hand, G. barchent, bar- chet (Schmeller), calico. Bombicinus, parchanus, parchanttuech.—Vocab. A. D. 1445 in Schmeller. ' Ut nullus scarlatas aut barracanos vel pretiosos burellos, qui Ratisboni fiunt, habeant.'—Op. S. Bern., ibid. MHG. barkân, barragân.

Barratry.—Barrator. See Barter.
Barrel. It. barile, Sp. barril, barrila, Fr. barrique, a wooden vessel made of bars or staves, but whether this be the true derivation may be doubtful.
Barren. Bret. bredhan; OFr. bre- haigne, baraigne; Picard, breine; Du. braeck, sterilis, semen non accipiens; braeckland, uncultivated, fallow.—Kil.
Barricade. Formed from Fr. barre, a bar; as cavalcade, from cavallo, a horse; and not from Fr. barrique, a barrel, as if it signified an impromptu barrier composed of barrels filled with earth. It is hard to separate barricade from Fr. barri, an obstruction, fortifi- cation, barrier.
Barrier. See Bar.
Barrister. The advocate who pleads at the Bar of a court of Justice.

Barrow, 1. An implement for carry- ing. AS. berewe, from beran, to carry. It. bara, a litter, a bier or implement for carrying a dead body. G. bahre, a bar- row, todtenbahre, or simply bahre, a bier. This word introduced into Fr. became bière, perhaps through Prov. bera, whence E. bier, alongside of barrow.
Barrow, 2. A mound either of stones or earth over the graves of warriors and nobles, especially those killed in battle, as the barrow at Dunmail-raise in West- moreland. AS. beorg, beorh, a hill, mound, rampart, heap, tomb, sepulchre, from beorgan, OE. berwen, to shelter, cover.
Worhton mid stanum anne steapne beorh him ofer. They made with stones a steep mound over him.—Joshua vii. 26.

Barrow-hog. AS. bearg; Bohem. braw, a castrated hog; Russ. borov', a boar.
Barter. Barter or trafficking by ex- change of goods seems, like bargain, to have been named from the haggling and wrangling with which the bargain is con- ducted. It is shown under Bargain how the syllable bar acquires the force of a root signifying confused noise, squabble, tumult. From this root were formed words in all the Romance languages, signifying, in the first instance, noisy contention, strife, dispute, then trafficking for profit, then cheating, over-reaching, unrighteous gain.
Al is day, n' is ther no night Ther n' is yare, nother strif.
Hickes in Rich.
They run like Bedlem barreters into the street.
—Hollinshed, ibid.
OFr. bareter, to deceive, lie, cog, foist in bargaining, to cheat, beguile, also to barter, truck, exchange.—Cotgr. MHG. barat, Pl.D. baraet (from Fr.), barter, deceit. MHG. partieren, to cheat, barat-tierer, a deceiver. Sp. baratar, to truck, exchange; baratear, to bargain; barateria, fraud, cheating, and especially fraud committed by the master of a ship with respect to the goods committed to him.
Baratry is when the master of a ship cheats the owners or insurers, by embezzling their goods or running away with the ship.—Bailey.
But according to Blackstone barratry consists in the offence of stirring up quarrels and suits between parties.
Bartizan. See Brattice.
Barton. A court-yard, also the demesne lands of a manor, the manor-house itself, the outhouses and yards.— Halliwell. AS. beretun, beortun, berewic, a court-yard, corn-farm, from bere, barley, and tun, inclosure, or wic, dwelling.— Bosworth.
Base. It. basso, Fr. bas, low, mean; Sp. baxo; w. and Bret. bâs, shallow, low, flat. The original meaning, according to Diez, would be, pressed down, thick. ' Bassus, crassus, pinguis.'—Gl. Isidore. ' Bassus, curtus, humilis.'—Papias. ' Ele a basses hanches et basses jambes.'
Basilisk. Gr. βασιλίσκος, from βασιλεύς, a king. A fabulous serpent, said to kill those that look upon it. There is not one that looketh upon his eyes, but he dieth presently. The like property hath the basilisk. A white spot or star it carrieth on the head and setteth it out like a coronet or diadem. If he but hiss no other serpent dare come near.—Holland's Pliny in Rich.
Late sibi submovet omne Vulgus et in vacuâ regnat Basiliscus arenâ.
Lucan.
Probably from reports of the cobra capel, which sets up its hood when angry, as the diadem of the basilisk.
To Bask. To heat oneself in the sun or before a fire. See Bath.
Basket. w. basg, netting, plaiting of splinters; basged, basgod, a basket; masg, a mesh, lattice-work. It is mentioned as a British word by Martial.
Barbara de pictis veni bascauda Britannis, Sed me jam mavult dicere Roma suam.

Bason. It. bacino, Fr. bassin, the diminutive of the word corresponding to E. back, signifying a wide open vessel.
Bass. It. basso, the low part of the scale in music.
Lend me your hands, lift me above Parnassus, With your loud trebles help my lowly bassus.
Sylvester's Dubartas.
Bassoon. It. bassone, an augment-ation of basso; an instrument of a very low note.
Bast.—Bass. Du. bast, bark, peel, husk; bast van koren, bran, the thin skin which covers the grain; Dan. Swed. Ger. bast, the inner bark of the lime-tree beaten out and made into a material for mats and other coarse fabrics. Dan. bast-maatte, bass-matting; bast-reb, a bass rope. Du. bast, a halter, rope for hanging, OE. bæste.
Bot ye sall take a stalworthe baste And binde my handes behind me faste.
MS. Halliwell.
Dan. baste, Sw. basta, to bind, commonly joined with the word binda, of the same sense. Sw. att basta og binda, to bind hand and foot. Dan. lægge een i baand og bast, to put one in fetters; and it is remarkable that the same expression is found in Turkish; besst, a tying, binding, besst-u-bendet, to bind. Lap. baste, the hoops of a cask.
Bastard. Apparently of Celtic origin, from Gael. baos, lust, fornication. OFr. Fils de bast, fils de bas.
He was begetin o' bast, God it wot.
Arthur and Merlin.
Sir Richard fiz le rei of whan we spake bevore Gentilman was ynow thei he were a bast ibore.
This man was son to John of Gaunt, descended of an honorable lineage, but born in bast, more noble in blood than notable in learning.— Hall in Halliwell.
So Turk. chasa, fornication, chasa ogli (ogli = son), a bastard.—F. Newman.
Malay anak-baudrek (child of adultery), a bastard.
To Baste. 1. To stitch, to sew with long stitches for the purpose of keeping the pieces of a garment in shape while it is permanently sewn. It. Sp. basta, a long stitch, preparatory stitching, the stitches of a quilt or mattrass. Sp. bastear, embastir. It. imbastire, Fr. bâtir, to baste, to stitch; Fris. Sicamb. besten, leviter consuere.—Kil. OHG. bestan, to patch, as It. imbastire, to baste on a piece of cloth.
Nay, mock not, mock not; the body of your discourse is sometimes guarded with fragments, and the guards are but slightly basted on neither.—Much Ado about Nothing. Derived by Diez from bast, as if that were the substance originally used in stitching, but this is hardly satisfactory. It seems to me that the sense of stitching, as a preparation for the final sewing of a garment, may naturally have arisen from the notion of preparing, contriving, setting up, which seems to be the general sense of the verb bastire, bastir, in the Romance languages. Thus we have Sp. bastir, disposer, pre-parer (Taboada); It. imbastire, to lay the cloth for dinner, to devise or begin a business (Altieri). Fr. bastir, to build, make, frame, erect, raise, set up, also to compose, contrive, devise. Bastir a quelqu'un son roulet, to teach one before-hand what he shall say or do.—Cot. Prov. guerra bastir, to set on foot a war; agait bastir, to lay an ambush.—Rayn. Sp. bastimento, victuals, provisions, things prepared for future use, also the basting or preparatory stitching of a gar-ment, stitching of a quilt or mattrass. To baste a garment would be to set it up, to put it together, and from this particular kind of stitching the signification would seem to have passed on to embrace stitching in general;

A silver nedil forth I drowe—And gan this nedill threde anone, For out of toune me list to gone, With a threde basting my slevis. Chaucer, R. R.—Sitze und beste mir den ermel wider in. Minnesinger in Schmid.

It is probably from the sense of stitch-ing that must be explained the It. basto, imbasto, a packsaddle, pad for the head to carry a weight on; Fr. bast, bât (whence the E. military term of a bat-horse), bastine, a pad or packsaddle, which was origin-ally nothing but a quilted cushion on which to rest the load. Thus Baretti explains Sp. bastear, to pack a saddle with wool, i. e. to quilt or stitch wool into it; and Cot: has bastine, a pad, packsaddle, the quilted saddle with which colts are backed.

2. To beat or bang soundly.—Bailey. This word probably preserves the form from whence is derived the Fr. baston, bâton, a stick, an instrument for beating, as well as besteau, the clapper of a bell. ON. beysta, to beat, to thrash; Dan. bøste, to drub, to belabour; Sw. dial. basa, baska, basta, to beat, to whip. Perhaps in the use of the E. term there is usually an erroneous feeling of its being a meta-phor from the notion of basting meat.—To baste one's hide; to give him a sound basting;

3. The sense of pouring dripping over meat at roast or rubbing the meat with fat to prevent its burning is derived from the notion of beating in the same way that the verb to stroke springs from the act of striking. Sw. stryk, beating, blows; stryka, to rub gently, to stroke, to spread bread and butter. Fr. frotter, to rub, is explained by Cot. also to cudgel, baste or knock soundly.

Bastinado. Sp. bastonada, a blow with a stick, Sp. Fr. baston. Fr. bastonnade, a cudgelling, bastonner, to cudgel. In English the term is confined to the beating on the soles of the feet with a stick, a favourite punishment of the Turks and Arabs. For the origin of baston see Baste, 2.

Bastion. It. bastia, bastida, bastione, a bastion, a sconce, a blockhouse, a bar-ricado.—Florio. Fr. bastille, bastilde, a fortress or castle furnished with towers, donjon, and ditches; bastion, the fortifi-cation termed a bastion or cullion-head.—Cot. All from bastir, to build, set up, contrive.

* Bat. 1. Sc. back, bak, bakie-bird; Sw. nattbaka, Dan. aftonbakke, the winged mammal. It. vipistrello, night-bat.—Fl. Bakke, flyinge best, vespertilio.—Pr. Pm. Mid.Lat. blatta, blacta, batta lucifuga, vespertilio, vledermus.—Dieff. Supp. to Duc. Chaufe-soriz is glossed a balke (for blake ?) in Bibeles-worth (Nat. Antiq. p. 164), and blak probably signifies a bat in the following passage:

But at that yche breyde That she furthe her synne seyde, Come fleyng oute at her mouthe a blak; That yche blak y dar wel telle, That hyt was a fende of helle. Manuel des Pecchés. 11864.

It is true the original has corneille, which was probably changed in the E. trans-lation to a bat, as a creature peculiarly connected with devilry and witchcraft. The name seems to be taken from ON. blaka, blakra, blakta, to flap, move to and fro in the air with a light rapid motion; whence ledrblaka, the bat; Sw. dial. blakka, natt-blakka, the night-jar or goat-sucker, a bird which, like the owl and the bat, seeks its insect prey on the wing in the evening. For the loss of the l in back, bat, compared with blakka, blatta, comp. E. badger, from Fr. bladier.

2. A staff, club, or implement for striking. In some parts of England it is the ordinary word for a stick at the present day. A Sussex woman speaks of putting a clung bat, or a dry stick, on the fire. In Suffolk batlins are loppings of trees made up into faggots. Bret, bat, a stick; Gael, bat, a staff, cudgel, bludgeon, and as a verb, to beat, to cudgel. Mgy. bat, a stick. The origin of the word is an imitation of the sound of a blow by the syllable bat, the root of E. beat. It. battere, Fr. battre, W. baeddu. Bat, a blow.—Hal. The lighter sound of the p in pat adapts the latter syllable to represent a gentle blow, a blow with a light instrument. The imitative nature of the root bat is apparent in Sp. batacazo, baquetazo, representing the noise made by one in falling.

Batch. A batch of bread is so much as is baked at one time, G. gebäck, gebäcke.

Bate. Strife; makebate, a stirrer-up of strife. Batyn, or make debate. Jurgor, vel seminare discordias vel discordare.—Pr. Pm. Fr. debat, strife, altercation, dispute.—Cot.

To Bate. I. Fr. abattre, to fell, beat, or break down, quell, allay; Sp. batir, to beat, beat down, lessen, remit, abate. 2. A term in falconry; to flutter with the wings. Fr. battre les ailes.

Bath.—To Bathe.—To Bask. ON. bada, G. baden, to bathe. The primary meaning of the word seems to be to warm, then to warm by the application of hot water, to foment, to refresh oneself in water whether warm or cold. Sw. dial. basa, båda, badda, to heat; solen baddar, the sun burns; solbase, the heat of the sun; badfish, fishes basking in the sun; basa, badda, båda vidjor, as E. dial, to beath wood, to heat it before the fire or in steam in order to make it take a certain bend.

Faine in the sonde to bathe her merrily Lieth Pertelotte, and all her sustirs by Ayenst the sunne.—Chaucer.

Flem. betten, to foment with hot applications. G. bähen, to foment, to warm, seems related to baden as Fr. trahir to It. tradire. Holz bähen, to beath wood; brot bähen, to toast bread. Hence probably may be explained the name of Baiae, as signifying warm baths, to which that place owed its celebrity.

It can hardly be doubted that bask is the reflective form of the foregoing verbs, from ON. badask, to bathe oneself, as E. busk, to betake oneself, from ON. buask for bua sik. 'I baske, I bathe in water or in any licoure.'—Palsgr. Sw. dial. at basa sig i solen, to bask in the sun. Da. dial. batte sig, to warm oneself at the fire or in the sun.

Perhaps the above may be radically identical with ON. baka, E. bake, to heat, Slav. pak, heat. Baka sik vid elld, to warm oneself at the fire. PLD. sich bakern, E. dial, to beak, to warm oneself.

To Batten. To thrive, to feed, to become fat. Goth. gabatnan, to thrive, to be profited, ON. batna, to get better, to become convalescent. Du. bat, bet, better, more. See Better.

Batten. In carpenter's language a scantling of wooden stuff from two to four inches broad, and about an inch thick.—Bailey. A batten fence is a fence made by nailing rods of such a nature across uprights. From bat in the sense of rod; perhaps first used adjectivally, bat-en, made of bats, as wood-en, made of wood.

Batter. Eggs, flour, and milk beaten up together.

To Batter.—Battery. Battery, a beating, an arrangement for giving blows, is a simple adoption of Fr. batterie, from battre, to beat. From battery was probably formed to batter under the consciousness of the root bat in the sense of blow, whence to batter would be a regular frequentative, signifying to give repeated blows, and would thus seem to be the verb from which battery had been formed in the internal development of the English language.

Battle.—Battalion. It. battere, Fr. battre, to beat; se battre, to fight, whence It. battaglia, Fr. bataille, a battle, also a squadron, a band of armed men arranged for fighting. In OE. also, battle was used in the latter sense.

Scaffaldis, Jeddris and covering, Pikkis, howis, and with staffslyng, To ilk lord and his bataille Wes ordanyt, quhar he suld assaill, Barbour in Jam.

Hence in the augmentative form It. battaglione, a battalion, a main battle, a great squadron.—Florio.

Battledoor. The bat with which a shuttlecock is struck backwards and forwards. Sp. batador, a washing beetle, a flat board with a handle for beating the wet linen in washing. Batyldoure or washynge betylle.—Pr. Pm.

Battlement. From OFr. bastille, a fortress or castle, was formed bastillé, made like a fortress, adapted for defence, viz. in the case of a wall, by projections which sheltered the defenders while they shot through the indentures. Mur bastille, an embattled wall, a wall with such notches and indentures or battlements. Batylment of a wall, propugnaculum.—Pr. Pm.

Si vey ung vergier grant et lé Enclos d'un hault mur bastillé.—R. R.

Bauble. 1. Originally an implement consisting of lumps of lead hanging from the end of a short stick, for the purpose of inflicting a blow upon dogs or the like, then ornamented burlesquely and used by a Fool as his emblem of office. 'Babullc or bable—librilla, pegma,' 'Librilla dicitur instrumentum librandi—a bable or a dogge malyote.' 'Pegma, baculus cum massâ plumbi in summitate pendente.'—Pr. Pm., and authorities in note.
The origin of the word is bab or bob, a lump, and as a verb to move quickly up and down or backwards and forwards. Gael. bab, a tassel or hanging bunch ; E. bablyn or waveryn, librillo, vacillo.—Pr. Pm.
2. Bauble in the sense of a plaything or trifle seems a different word, from Fr. babiole, a trifle, whimwham, guigaw, or small toy to play withal.—Cot. It. babbolare, to play the babby, to trifle away the time as children do ; babbole, childish baubles, trifles, fooleries or fond toys.—Fl. Swiss baben, to play with dolls or toys.
Baudrick.—Baldrick. Prov. baudrat, OFr. baudré ; OHG. balderich, a belt.—Diez. Baudrick in OE. is used for a sword-belt, scarf, collar.
Bavin. A brush faggot. OFr. baffe, faisceau, fagot.—Lacombe. An analogous form with an initial g instead of a b is seen in Fr. javelle, a gavel, or sheaf of corn, also a bavin or bundle of dry sticks.—Cot. The word may perhaps be derived from the above-mentioned bab or bob, a lump or cluster ; Gael. baban, babhaid, a tassel, cluster ; Fr. bobine, a bobbin or cluster of thread.
Bawdekin. Cloth of gold. It. baldacchino, s. s., also the canopy carried over the head of distinguished persons in a procession, because made of cloth of gold. The original meaning of the word is Bagdad stuff, from Baldacca, Bagdad, because cloth of gold was imported from Bagdad.
Bawdy. Filthy, lewd ; in OE. dirty.
His overest slop it is not worth a mite— It is all bawdy, and to-tore also.—Chaucer.
What doth cleer perle in a bawdy boote. Lydgate.

Swiss. bau, dung; baue, to manure the fields. W. baw, dirt, filth, excrement. To baw, to void the bowels.—Hal. Sc. bauch, disgusting, sorry, bad.—Jam.
From Baw ! an interjection of disgust, equivalent to Faugh ! being a representation of the exspiration naturally resorted to as a defence against a bad smell.

Ye baw ! quoth a brewere I woll noght be ruled By Jhesu for all your janglynge With Spiritus Justiciæ.—P. P.
—for they beth as bokes tell us Above Goddes workes.
'Ye baw for bokes' quod oon Was broken out of Helle.—P. P.
The It. oibo ! fie ! fie upon (Altieri), Fr. bah ! pooh ! nonsense ! and Sp. baf ! expressive of disgust, must all be referred to the same origin. 'There is a cholericke or disdainful interjection used in the Irish language called Boagh ! which is as much in English as Twish !'—Hollinshed, Descript. Irel. c. 8. To this exactly corresponds Fr. pouac ! faugh ! an interjection used when anything filthy is shown or said, whence pouacre, rotten, filthy.—Cot. In like manner Grisons buah ! buh ! exclamation of astonishment, leads to bua (in children's language), nastiness, filth.
To Bawl. Formed from baw, the representation of a loud shout, as Fr. miauler, E. to mewl, to make the noise represented by the syllable miau, mew. The sound of a dog barking is represented by bau, bow (as in our nursery bow-wow, a dog). Lat. baubare, Piedm. fé bau, to bark ; baulé, to bark, to talk noisily, obstrepere.—Zalli. Swiss Rom. bouala, bouaila, to vociferate, to cry.—Bridel. ON. baula, to low or bellow as an ox.
Bawson. A name of the badger, from the streaks of white on his face. It. balzano, a horse with white legs. Fr. balzan, a horse that hath a white leg or foot, the white of his leg or foot, also more generally a white spot or mark in any part of his body.—Cotgr. Prov. bausan, OFr. bauçant, a horse marked with white. Beauséant, the famous standard of the Templars, was simply a field divided between black and white. E. dial. bawsoned, having a white streak down the face. From Bret. bal, a white mark on the face of animals, or the animal so marked, whence the E. name of a cart-horse, Ball. Gael. ball, a spot, a plot of ground, an object. Ball-seirc, a beauty-spot, ballach, spotted, speckled. E. piebald, marked like a pie. Probably connected with Pol. bialo, Russ. bielo, Bohem. bjly, white. Serv. bijel, white, bilyega, a mark, bilyejiti, to mark. See Bald.

Bay, 1. A hollow in the line of coast. Fr. baie. It. baja, Sp. bahia. Catalan badia, from badar, to open, to gape, dividere, dehiscere ; badarse, to open as a blossom, to split. From Cat. badia to Sp. bahia, the step is the same as from It. tradire to Fr. trahir, to betray. See At Bay.

Bay, 2.—Bay-window. The same fundamental idea of an opening also gives rise to the application of the term Bay (in Architecture) to ‘a space left in a wall for a door, gate, or window’—(in Fortification), to ‘holes in a parapet to receive the mouth of a cannon.’—Bailey. A barn of two bays, is one of two divisions or unbroken spaces for stowing corn, &c., one on each side of the threshing-floor.

Earth By Nature made to till, that by the yearly birth The large-bayed barn doth fill.—Drayton in R.
In great public libraries cases may be erected abutting into the apartment from the piers of the windows, as they do not obstruct the light or air, and afford pleasant bays in which to study in quiet.—Journal Soc. Arts, Feb. 25, 1859.

A bay-window then is a window containing in itself a bay, or recess in an apartment ; in modern times, when the architectural meaning of the word was not generally understood, corrupted into Bow-window, as if to signify a window of curved outline. Fr. bée, a hole, overture, or opening in the wall or other part of a house, &c.—Cot. Swiss beie, baye, window ; bayen-stein, window-sill.—Stalder. Swab. bay, large window in a handsome house.—Schmid.

Bay. Lat. badius, Sp. bayo, It. bajo, Fr. bai. Gael. buidhe, yellow ; buidhe-ruadh, buidhe-dhonn, bay.

To Bay. To bark as a dog. It. abbaiare, Fr. babayer, Lat. latibari, Gr. βαΰζειν, Piedm. fé bau, from an imitation of the sound. See Bawl.

At Bay. It has been shown under Abide, Abide, that from ba, representing the sound made in opening the mouth, arose two forms of the verb, one with and one without the addition of a final d to the root. 1st. It. badare, having the primary signification of opening the mouth, then of doing whatever is marked by involuntarily opening the mouth, as gazing, watching intently, desiring, waiting ; and 2ndly, Fr. baher, baer, béer, baier, to open the mouth, to stare, to be intent on anything.

From the former verb is the It. expression tenere a bada, to keep one waiting, to keep at a bay, to amuse ; stare a bada a'uno, to stand watching one.

Tal parve Anteo a me, che stava a bada di vederlo chinare. Such Antaeus seemed to me, who stood watching him stoop. Non ti terrò con verso lungo e dubbi discorsi a bada. I will not keep you waiting with a long story, &c. I Pisani si mostrarono di volergli assalire di quella parte e comminciarono vi l'assalto per tenere i nemici a bada. i. e. in order to keep the enemy in check, or at bay.

Ne was there man so strong but he down bore Ne woman yet so faire but he her brought Unto his bay and captived her thought.—F. Q. he brought her to stand listening to him.

So well he wooped her and so well he wrought her With faire entreaty and swete blandishment That at the length unto a bay he brought her So as she to his speeches was content To lend one ear and softly to relent.—F. Q.

The stag is said to stand at bay, when, weary of running, he turns and faces his pursuers, and keeps them in check for a while. As this crisis in the chase is expressed in Fr. by the term rendre les abois, the term at bay has been supposed to be derived from the Fr. aux derniers abois, at his last gasp, put to his last shifts, which however, as may be seen from the foregoing examples, would give but a partial explanation of the expression.

Bayonet. Fr. baionette, a dagger.—Cot. Said to have been invented at Bayonne, or to have been first used at the siege of Bayonne in 1665.—Diez.

Bay-tree. The laurus nobilis or true laurel of the ancients, the laurel-bay, so called from its bearing bays, or berries.

The royal laurel is a very tall and big tree—and the baies or berries (baccæ) which it bears are nothing biting or unpleasant in taste.—Holland's Pliny in R.

A garland of bays is commonly represented with berries between the leaves.

The word bay, Fr. baie, a berry, is perhaps not directly from Lat. bacca, which itself seems to be from a Celtic root, W. bacan, berries. Gael. bagaid, a cluster of grapes or nuts. Prov. baca, baga, OSp. baca. Mod. Sp. baya, the cod of peas, husk, berry. It. baccello, the cod or husk of beans or the like, especially beans.

* To Be. AS. beon; Gael. beo, alive, living ; beothach, a beast, living thing ; Ir. bioth, life, the world ; Gr. βίος, life.

It is not until a somewhat advanced stage in the process of abstraction that the idea of simple being is attained, and a verb with that meaning is wholly wanting in the rudest languages. The negro who speaks imperfect English uses instead the more concrete notion of living. He says, Your hat no lib that place you put him in.—Farrar, Chapters on Lang, p. 54. A two-year old nephew of mine would say, Where it live? where is it? Now the breath is universally taken as the type of life, and the syllable pu or fu is widely used in the most distant languages to express the notion of blowing or breathing, and thus may explain the origin of the root fu in Lat. fui, fuisse, or of Sanscr. bhu, be.

Beach. The immediate shore of the sea, the part overflowed by the tide. Thence applied to the pebbles of which the shore often consists. We haled our bark over a bar of beach, or pebble stones, into a small river.—Hackluyt in R.

Perhaps a modification of Dan. bakke, N. bakkje, Sw. backe, a hill, bank, rising ground. In Norfolk bank is commonly used instead of beach.—Miss Gurney in Philolog. Trans. vol. vii.

Beacon.—Beck.—Beckon. OHG. bauhan, OSax. bokan, AS. beacen, a sign, a nod; OHG. fora-bauhan, a presage, prodigy; bauhnjan, ON. bákna, AS. beacnian, nutu significare, to beckon. The term beacon is confined in E. to a fire or some conspicuous object used as a signal of danger.

The origin seems preserved in E. beck, to bow or nod; Catalan becar, to nod; Gael. beic, a curtsey, perhaps from the image of a bird pecking; Gael. beic, a beak.

Than peine I me to stretchen forth my neck, And East and West upon the peple I becke, As doth a dove sitting upon a bern. Pardoner's Tale.

He (Hardicanute) made a law that every Inglis man sal bek and discover his lied quhen he met ane Dane.—Bellenden in Jam.

Esthon. nokkima, to peck as a bird; nokkutoma pead, to nod the head.

Bead. A ball of some ornamental material, pierced for hanging on a string, and originally used for the purpose of helping the memory in reciting a certain tale of prayers or doxologies. AS. bead, gebed, a prayer. See To Bid. To bid one's bedes or beads was to say one's prayers.

Beadle. AS. bydel, the messenger of a court, officer in attendance on the dignitaries of a university or church. Fr. bedeau. It. bidello. Probably an equivalent of the modern waiter, an attendant, from AS. bidan, to wait. It will be observed that the word attendant has also a like origin in Fr. attendre, to wait.

Home is he brought and laid in sumptuous bed Where many skilful leeches him abide To salve his hurts.—F. Q. i. e. wait upon him.

* Beagle. A small kind of hound tracking by scent. 'The Frenchmen still like good beagles following their prey.'—Hall's Chron. Commonly referred to Fr. beugler, to bellow, which is, however, not applied to the yelping of dogs. Moreover the name, according to Menage, was introduced from England into France, and therefore was not likely to have a French origin.

Beak. A form that has probably descended to us from a Celtic origin. Gael. beic. 'Cui Tolosae nato cognomen in pueritia Becco fuerat: id valet gallinacei rostrum.'—Suetonius in Diez. It. becco, Fr. bec, Bret. bek, W. pig. It forms a branch of a very numerous class of words clustered round a root pik, signifying a point, or any action done with a pointed thing.

Beam.—Boom. Goth. bagms, ON. baðmr, G. baum, Du. boom, a tree. AS. beám, a tree, stock, post, beam. The boom of a vessel is the beam or pole by which the sail is stretched, coming to us, like most nautical terms, from the Netherlands or North Germany.

Bean. G. bohne; ON. baun. Gr. κύανος, κύαμος, Lat. faba, Slavon. bob. W. ffa, beans, ffaen, a single bean, the addition of a final en being the usual mark of individuality. Bret. fâ or fav, beans, or the plant which bears them; faen or faven, a single bean, plur. faennou or faennou, as well as fâ or fav. Thus the final en, signifying individuality, adheres to the root, and Lat. faba is connected through Oberdeutsch bobn (Schwenck) with G. bohne, E. bean.

Bear. The wild beast. G. bär, ON. biörn. To Bear. Lat. fero, fer-re; Gr. φέρειν; Goth. bairan, to carry, support, and also to bear children, to produce young. The latter sense may have been developed through the notion of a tree bearing fruit, or from the pregnant mother carrying her young. It is singular, however, that the forms corresponding to the two significations should be so distinct in Latin, fero, to carry, παρίω, to bear children, produce, bring forth.
From bear in the sense of carrying we have Goth. baurthei, ON. byrði, E. burden; from the same in the sense of bearing children, Goth. gabaurths, birth. The ON. burðr is used in the sense of a carrying, bearing, and also in that of birth.

Beard. G. bart, Russ. boroda. Bohem. brada, the beard, chin. Lat. barba, W. barf. Perhaps radically identical with ON. barð, a lip, border, edge. See Halberd.

Beast. Lat. bestia; Gael. biast, an animal, perhaps a living thing, beo, living; W. byw, living, to live.

Beat. AS. beatan; It. battere, Fr. battre; from a root bat, imitative of the sound of a sharp blow, as pat imitates that of a more gentle one. See Bat.

Beauty. Fr. beauté, from beau, bel. It. bello, Lat. bellus, pretty, handsome, agreeable.

Beaver. 1. The quadruped. G. biber, Lat. fiber, Lith. bebrus, Slav. bobr, Fr. bièvre. Secondarily applied to a hat, because made of the fur of the beaver. Perhaps from Pol. babrać, to dabble; bobrować, to wade through the water like a beaver.

2. The moveable part of a helmet, which, when up, covered the face, and when down occupied the place of a child's bib or slobbering cloth. Fr. bavière, from baver, to slobber. It. bava, Sp. baba, Fr. bave, slobber. The OFr. bave expressed as well the flow of the saliva as the babble of the child, whence baveux, bavard, Prov. baveç, talkative.—Diez.

Beck, 1. — Beckon. A nod or sign. See Beacon.

Beck, 2. ON. bekkr, Dan. bæk, G. bach, a brook. As rivus, a brook, is connected with ripa, a bank, while from the latter are derived It. riviera, a bank, shore, or river, and Fr. rivière, formerly a bank, but now a river only; and ON. bekkr, signifies both bench (= bank) and brook; it is probable that here also the name applied originally to the bank then to the brook itself. See Bank.

To Become. 1. To attain to a certain condition, to assume a certain form or mode of being. AS. becuman, to attain to, to arrive at.
Thæt þu mæge becuman to þam gesælþan þe ece þurhwuniaþ. That thou mayest attain to those goods which endure for ever.—Boeth.
G. bekommen, to get, receive, obtain, acquire.—Küttner. It will be observed that we often use indifferently become or get; 'He got very angry,' 'He became very angry,' are equivalent expressions, implying that he attained the condition of being very angry.

2. In a second sense to become is to be fitting or suitable. G. bequem, convenient, fit, proper; E. comely, pleasing, agreeable. This meaning is to be explained from AS. becuman, to come to or upon, to befall, to happen. He becom on sceaþan, he fell among thieves. Þæm godum becymþ anfeald yfel, to the good hap- pens unmixed evil.—Bosworth. Now the notion of being convenient, suitable, fit- ting, rests on the supposition of a purpose to be fulfilled, or a feeling to be gratified. If the accidents or circumstances of the case happen as we would have them, if they fall in with what is required to satisfy our taste, judgment, or special purpose, we call the arrangement becoming, con- venient, proper, and we shall find that these and similar notions are commonly expressed by derivatives from verbs sig- nifying to happen. Thus OE.: fall was constantly used in the sense of falling or happening rightly, happening as it ought.
Do no favour, I do thee pray, It fallith nothing to thy name To make fair semblant where thou mayest blame.
Chaucer, R. R.
In darkness of unknowynge they gonge Without light of understandynge Of that þat falleth to ryghte knowynge.
Prick of Conscience. i. e. of that that belongeth to right know- ing. So in ON. 'all-vel til Hofðingia fallinn,' every way suited to a prince. G. gefallen, to please, to fall in with our taste, as fall itself was sometimes used in E. With shepherd sits not following flying fame.
But feed his flock in fields where fall him best.
Shep. Cal.
On the same principle, AS. limpian, to happen, to appertain, limplice, fitly; ge- limpan, to happen, gelimplic, opportune. AS. timan, getiman, to happen, G. ziemen, to become, befit, E. seemly, suitable, proper; OSw. tiða, to happen, tidig, fit, decent, decorous, E. tidy, now confined to the sense of orderly. In like manner Turk. dushmak, to fall, to happen, to fall to the lot of any one, to be a part of his duty, to be incumbent upon him.

Bed. A place to lie down, to sleep on. Goth. badi, ON. beðr, G. Bett.

Bedizen. To load with ornament, to dress with unbecoming richness; and to dizen out was used in the same sense. Probably from OE. dizen or dizen, to clothe a distaff with flax, though the metaphor does not appear a striking one to our ears. I dysyn a dystaffe, I put the flax upon it to spin.—Palsgr. But possibly bedizen may be from Fr. badigeonner, to rough-cast, to colour with lime-wash, erroneously modified in form, by the analogy of be-dawb, as if it were derived from a simple verb to dizen, which latter would thus be brought into use by false etymology. The passage from a soft g to z is of frequent occurrence, as in It. prigione, Fr. prison; Venet. cogionare, E. cozen; It. cugino, E. cousin. To plaister or bedawb with ornament is exactly the image represented by be-dizen. The same metaphor is seen in Fr. crespir, to parget or rough-cast; femme crespie de couleurs, whose face is all to bedawbed or plaistered over with painting.—Cot.

Bedlam. A madhouse, from the hospital of St Mary, Bethlehem, used for that purpose in London.

Bedouin. Arab. bedawi, a wandering Arab; an inhabitant of the desert, from bedou (in vulgar Arab.), desert.

Bed-ridden. Confined to bed. AS. bedrida, Pl.D. bedde-redir; ohg. bet-tiriso, from risan, to fall.—Grimm. Pett-ris, qui de lecto surgere non potest; pettiriso, paralyticus.—Gl. in Schmeller. So Gr. κλινοπετής, from πετ-, fall.

Bee. The honey-producing insect. AS. beo; ON. by-fluga; G. biene, Bernese, beji. Gael. beach, a bee, a wasp, a stinging fly; beach-each, a horse-fly; speach, a blow or thrust, also the bite or sting of a venomous creature, a wasp.

Beech. A tree. G. buche, ON. beyki, Slav. buk, buka, bukva, Lat. fagus, Gr. φηγός.

Beef. Fr. bœuf, an ox, the meat of the ox. It. bove, from Lat. bos, bovis, an ox.

Hue drone of the beere To knyght and skyere.—1. 1114. Hue fulde the horn of wyne And dronk to that pelryne. K. Horn, 1156.

2. A pillow-beer, a pillow-case. Dan. vaar, a cover, case, pude-vaar, a pil-low case. G. kissen-biere. Pl.D. büren, kissen-büren, a cushion-cover; beds-büren, a bed-tick. Properly a cover that may be slipped on and off. Fin. wäärin, I turn (a garment), Esthon. pöördma, to turn, to twist; pöorma, to turn, to change; padja-poor, a pillow-case or pillow-beer (paddi, a pad or cushion).

* Beestings. The first milk after a cow has calved, which is thick and clotty, and in Northampton called cherry-curds. G. biest-milch, also bienst, briest, briesch-milch; AS. beost, byst. The meaning of the word is curdled. Fr. caille-boulli, curded or beesty, as the milk of a woman that is newly delivered.—Cot. Prov. sang vermeilh betatz, red curdled blood.—Rom. de Fierabras in Diez. The earth was in the Middle Ages supposed to be surrounded by a sea of so thick a substance as to render navigation impossible. This was called mer bétée in Fr. and lebermer in G., the loppered sea, from leberen, to curdle or lopper. 'La mars betada, sela que environna la terra.' In a passage of an Old Fr. translation cited by Diez, 'ausi com ele (la mer) fust bietée,' the last word corresponds to co-agulatum in the original Latin. Lat. bees, thick, close together as teeth in a comb, trees in a forest; beest, to become thick, to coagulate.

Beet. A garden-herb. Fr. bette or blette; Lat. beta, bletum; Gr. βλήτον, spinach.

Beetle. 1. The general name of insects having a horny wing-cover. Probably named from the destructive qualities of those with which we are most familiar. AS. bitel, the biter. 'Mordicaz, bitela.'—Gl. Ælfr. in Nat. Ant.

2. Beetle, boytle, a wooden hammer for driving piles, stakes, wedges, &c.—B. AS. bytl, a mallet. Pl. D. betel, bötel, a clog for a dog; böteln, to knock, to flatten sods with a beater. G. beutel, a mallet for beating flax. Bav. bossen, to knock, to beat; bossel, a washing beetle or bat for striking the wet linen. Fr. bate, a paviour's beetle; batail. It. battaglio, a clapper, the knocker of a door. But besides signifying the instrument of beating, beetle also signified the im-

Beer. 1. Originally, doubtless, drink, from the root pi, drink, extant in Bohem. piti, to drink, imperative pi, whence piwo, beer. The Lat. bibere is a reduplicated form of the root, which also appears in Gr. πίνω, πίνω, to drink, and in Lat. poculum, a cup or implement for drink; potus, drink. Gael. bior, water. In OE. beer seems to have had the sense of drink, comprehending both wine and ale. Rymenild ros of benche The beer al for te shenche After mete in sale, Bothe wyn and ale. An horn hue ber an hond, For that was law of lond, plement driven by blows, a stone-cutter's chisel, a wedge for cleaving wood. OHG. steinbozil, lapidicinus.—Schm. G. beis- sel, beutel, Du. beitel, a chisel, a wedge. —a grete oke, which he had begonne to cleve, and as men be woned he had smeten two betels therein, one after that other, in suche wyse that the oke was wide open.—Caxton's Reynard the Fox, chap. viii. In the original So had he daer twee beitels ingheslagen. N. & Q. Nov. 2, 1867. When by the help of wedges and beetles an image is cleft out of the trunk.—Stillingfleet. The G. beissel, Du. beitel, a chisel, is com- monly, but probably erroneously, referred to the notion of biting.

To Beg. Skinner's derivation from bag, although it appears improbable at first, carries conviction on further examination. The Flem. beggaert (Delfortrie) probably exhibits the original form of the word, whence the E. begger, and subsequently the verb to beg. Beghardus, vir mendi- cans.—Vocab. 'ex quo.' A.D. 1430, in Deutsch. Mundart. iv. Hence the name of Begard given to the devotees of the 13th & 14th centuries, also called Bigots, Lollards, &c. It must be borne in mind that the bag was a universal character- istic of the beggar, at a time when all his alms were given in kind, and a beggar is hardly ever introduced in our older writers without mention being made of his bag. Hit is beggares rihte vorte beren bagge on bac and burgeises forto beren purses.—Ancren Riwle, 168.

Ac beggers with bagges— Reccheth never the ryche Thauh such lorelles sterven.—P. P. Bidderes and beggeres Fæste about yede With hire belies & here bagges Of brede full ycrammed.—P. P. Bagges and begging he bad his folk leven. P. P. Creed. And yet these bilderes wol beggen a bag full of whete Of a pure poor man.—P. P. And thus gate I begge Without bagge other botel But my wombe one.—P. P. That maketh beggers go with bordons and bags.—Political Songs.

So from Gael, bag (baigean, a little bag), baigeir, a beggar, which may per- haps be an adoption of the E. word, but in the same language from poc, a bag or poke, is formed pocair, a beggar; air a phoc, on the tramp, begging, literally, on the bag. Lith. krapszas, a scrip; su krapszais aplink eiti, to go a begging. From W. ysgrepan, a scrip, ysgrepanu, to go a begging. It. bertola, a wallet, such as poor begging friars use to beg withal; bertolare, to shift up and down for scraps and victuals.—Florio. Dan. pose, a bag; pose-pilte, a beggar-boy. Mod. Gr. θύλακος, a bag, a scrip; θυλακίζω, to beg. Fr. Mettre quelq'un a la besace, to re- duce him to beggary.

To Begin. AS. aginnan, onginnan, beginnan. Goth. duginnan. In Luc vi. 25, the latter is used as an auxiliary of the future, 'Unte gaunon jah gretan duginnid,' for ye shall lament and weep. In a similar manner gan or can was fre- quently used in OE. 'Aboutin undern gan this Erle alight.'—Clerk of Oxford's tale. He did alight, not began to alight, as alighting is a momentary operation. The tother seand the dint cum, gan provyde To eschew swiftlie, and sone lap on syde That all his force Entellus can apply Into the are— D. V. 142. 40. Down duschit the beist, deid on the land can ly Spreuland and flycterand in the dede thrawes. D. V. To Scotland went he then in hy And all the land gan occupy. Barbour, Bruce. The verb to gin or begin appears to be one of that innumerable series derived from a root gan, gen, ken, in all the lan- guages of the Indo-Germanic stock, sig- nifying to conceive, to bear young, to know, to be able, giving in Gr. γίγνομαι, γίνομαι, γένος, γιγνώσκω, γινώσκω, in Lat, gigno, genus, in E. can, ken, kind, &c. The fundamental meaning seems to be to attain to, to acquire. To produce children is to acquire, to get children; bigitan in Ulphilas is always to find; in AS. it is both to acquire and to beget, to get children. To begin may be explained either from the fundamental notion of attaining to, seizing, taking up, after the analogy of the G. anfangen, and Lat. incipere, from G. fangen and Lat. capere, to take; or the meaning may have passed through a similar stage to that of Gr. γίγνομαι, γίνετai, to be born, to arise, to begin; γένεσις, γενετή, origin, beginning. It will be observed that get is used as an auxiliary in a manner very similar to the OE. gan, can, above quoted; 'to get beaten;' ON. 'at geta talad,' to be able to talk; 'abouten undern gan this earl alight,' about undern he got down.

Begone. Gold-begone, ornamented with gold, covered with gold—D. V.; woe-begone, oppressed with woe. Du. begaan, affected, touched with emotion begaen zijt met eenighe saecke, premi curæ alicujus rei, laborare, solicitum esse.—Kil.
To Behave. The notion of behaviour is generally expressed by means of verbs signifying to bear, to carry, to lead. Ye shall dwell here at your will. But your bearing be full ill. K. Robert in Warton.
It. portarsi, to behave; portarsi da Paladino, for a man to behave or carry himself stoutly.—Fl. G. betragen, be- haviour, from tragen, to carry. In ac- cordance with these analogies we should be inclined to give to the verb have in behave the sense of the Sw. hæfwa, to lift, to carry, the equivalent of E. heave, rather than the vaguer sense of the aux- iliary to have, Sw. hæfwa, habere. But, in fact, the two verbs seem radically the same, and their senses intermingle. Sw. hæfwa in sæd, to carry corn into the barn; hæf tig bort, take yourself off; hæfwa bort, to take away, to turn one out; hæfwa fram, to bring forwards. AS. habban, to have, hæfjan, to heave; uf- habban, us-hæfjan, to raise. G. gehaben, to behave, and (as Fr. se porter) to fare well or ill.
Mid hym he had a stronge axe—So strong and so gret that an other hit scholde hebbe unethe.—R. G. 17.

Behest.—Hest. Command, injunc- tion. AS. hæs, command; behæs, vow; behæt, gehæt, vow, promise; behætan, ge- hætan, OE. behête, to vow, to promise; AS. hâtan, to vow, promise, command; Du. heeten, to command, to name, to call, to be named; heeten willekom, to bid one welcome. ON. heita, to call, to be named, to vow, exhort, invoke. Goth. haitan, to call, to command. The general meaning seems to be to speak out, an act which may amount either to a promise or a command, according as the subject of the announcement is what the speaker undertakes to do himself, or what he wishes another to do; or the object of the speaker may be simply to indicate a particular individual as the person addressed, when the verb will have the sense of calling or naming.
Behind. At the back of. The re- lations of place are most naturally ex- pressed by means of the different mem- bers of the body. Thus in Finnish the name of the head is used to express what is on the top of or opposite to, the name of the ear to express what is on the side of anything. And so from hanta, the tail, are formed hannassa, behind, han- nittaa, to follow, hantyri, a follower, and as the roots of many of our words are preserved in the Finnish languages, it is probable that we have in the Finnish hanta the origin of our behind, at the tail of.
To Behold. To look steadily upon. The compound seems here to preserve what was the original sense of the simple verb to hold. AS. healdan, to regard, observe, take heed of, to tend, to feed, to keep, to hold. To hold a doctrine for true is to regard it as true, to look upon it as true; to hold it a cruel act is to regard it as such. The Lat. servare, to keep, to hold, is also found in the sense of looking, commonly expressed, as in the case of E. behold, by the compound observare. ' Tuus servus servet Venerine faciat an Cupidini.' Let your slave look whether she sacrifices to Venus or to Cupid.—Plautus. The verb to look itself is frequently found in the sense of looking after, seeing to, taking notice or care of (Gloss. to R. G.). The It. guardare, to look, exhibits the original meaning of the Fr. garder, to keep or hold, and the E. ward, keeping. The supposition then that the notion of preserving, keeping, holding is origin- ally derived from that of looking, is sup- ported by many analogies, while it seems an arbitrary ellipse to explain the sense of behold as ' to keep or hold (sc. the eyes fixed upon any object).'—Richardson.
Beholden in the sense of indebted is the equivalent of Du. gehouden, G. ge- halten, bound, obliged. Aan iemand gehouden zijn, to be obliged to one, to be beholden to him. G. zu etwas gehalten seyn, to be obliged to do a thing. Wohl gewissera gehalten seyn, to be well pleased with one's conduct.—Küttn.
* To Behove. To be expedient, to be required for the accomplishment of any purpose; behoof, what is so required, hence advantage, furtherance, use. AS. behofian, to be fit, right, or necessary, to stand in need of; behæfe, advantage, be- hoof. The expression seems to be taken from the figure of throwing at a mark. To heave a stone is used in vulgar language for throwing it. N. hevja, to lift, to heave; hevja, höve, to cast or throw; höva, to hit the mark, to meet, adjust, adapt, to be suitable or becoming; hovast, to meet, to fit. Sw. hofwa, the distance within which one can strike an object or attain a certain end, and, met. measure, bounds, moderation. Det er öfwer er höfwa, cela est audessus de votre portée, that is above your capacity; where it will be observed that the Fr. employs the same metaphor in the term portée, range, distance to which a piece will carry.
In the middle voice höfwas, to be required for a certain purpose, to befit, behove. Det höfdes en annatt til at uträtta slikt, it behoved another kind of man to do such things. ON. hæfsa, to hit the mark; hæfi, aim, reach, fitness, proportion. See Gain. 3.

To Belay. Du. beleggen, to lay around, overspread, beset, garnish; belegsel, fringe, border, ornament.
All in a woodman's jacket he was clad Of Lincoln green belayed with golden lace.—F. Q.
Du. De kabel aan de beeting beleggen, to lay the cable round the bits, to make it fast, in nautical language, to belay.

To Belch. AS. bealcan, bealcettan; OE. to bolk, to boke, to throw up wind from the stomach with a sudden noise. Doubtless an imitation of the sound. Another application of the same word is in Pl.D. and Du. bolken, bulken, to bellow, to roar.

Beldam. Fair sir and Fair lady, Fr. beau sire and bel dame, were civil terms of address. Then, probably because a respectful form of address would be more frequent towards an elderly than a young person, beldam became appropriated to signify an old woman, and finally an ugly and decrepit old woman.

Belfry. Fr. beffroi, OFr. berfroi, beffroit, a watch tower, from mhG. bercvrit, bervrit, a tower for defence; OHG. frid, a tower, turris, locus securitatis—Schilter, and bergan, to protect. The word became singularly corrupted in foreign languages, appearing in Mid.Lat. under the forms belfredum, bertefredum, battefredum. It. bettifredo, a little shed, stand, or house, built upon a tower for soldiers to stand centinel in; also a blockhouse or a sconce.—Fl. In England a false etymology has confined the name of belfry, properly belonging to the church tower, to the chamber in the upper part of the tower in which the bells are hung.

To Believe. It is not obvious how to harmonise the senses of believing, praising, permitting or giving leave, promising, which are expressed in the different Teutonic dialects by essentially the same word or slight modifications of it; Pl.D. loven, laven, to believe; Du. loven, to praise, to promise, orloven, to give leave; Dan. lov, praise, reputation, leave; ON. lofa, leyfa, to praise, to give leave; AS. leafa, geleafa, belief; gelyfan, to believe, lyfan, alyfan, to give leave; G. glauben, to believe, loben, to praise, erlauben, to permit, verloben, to promise or engage.
The fundamental notion seems to be to approve, to sanction an arrangement, to deem an object in accordance with a certain standard of fitness. In this sense we have Goth. galaubs, filu-galaubs, precious, honoured, esteemed; ungalaubkas, εἰς ἀτιμίαν σκεῦος, a vessel made for dishonour, for purposes of low estimation; Pl.D. laven, Du. loven, to fix a price upon one's wares, to estimate them at a certain rate. To believe, then, Goth. laubjan, galaubjan, is to esteem an assertion as good for as much as it lays claim to; if a narration, to esteem it true or in accordance with the fact it professes to describe; if a promise, to esteem it as in accordance with the intention of the promiser.
The sense of praising may be easily deduced from the same radical notion. To praise is essentially to prise, to put a high price or value on, to extol the worth of anything, to express approval, or high estimation. Hence to simple approbation, satisfaction, consent, permission, is an easy progress. Pl.D. to der swaren lave, to the approbation or satisfaction of the sworn inspectors; mit erven lave, with the consent of the heirs. In Mid.Lat. the consent given by a lord to the alienation of a tenant's fief was expressed by the term laws, and E. allow, which has been shown to be derived from laudare, is used in the sense of approving, esteeming good and valid, giving leave or permission, and sometimes in a sense closely analogous to that of believe.
The principles which all mankind allow for true, are innate; those that men of right reason admit are the principles allowed by all mankind.—Locke.

Bell. From AS. bellan, ON. belja, boare, to resound, to sound loudly; Sw. böla, to bellow; Northamptonshire, to bell, to make a loud noise, to cry out (Sternberg). A bell, then, ON. bialla, is an implement for making a loud noise.
Templorum campana boant.—Ducange.
ON. bylja, resonare, and E. peal, are other modifications of the same imitative root, of which the latter is specially applied to the sound of bells. The same imitation is found in Galla, bilbila, bell; bil-bil-goda, to make bilbil, to ring.—Tut-schek.

Bellows.—Belly. The word balg, bolg, is used in several Celtic and Teutonic languages to signify any inflated skin or case. Gael, balg, bolg, a leather bag, wallet, belly, blister; balgan-snamha, the swimming bladder; balgan-uisge, a water-bubble; builge, bags or bellows, seeds of plants. Bret, belch, bolch, polch, the bolls or husks of flax; AS. bælg, a bag, pouch, cod or husk of pulse, wallet; blæst-bælg, a bellows; G. balg, skin, husk, pod, the skin of those animals that are stripped off whole; blase-balg, a blowing-skin, bellows. ON. belgr, an inflated skin, leather sack, bellows, belly. Sw. bælg, a bellows, vulgarly the belly.

The original signification is probably a water-bubble (still preserved by the Gaelic diminutive balgan), which affords the most obvious type of inflation. The application of the term to the belly, the sack-like case of the intestines, as well as to a bellows or blowing-bag, needs no explanation. It seems that bulga was used for womb or belly by the Romans, as a fragment of Lucilius has:

Ita ut quisque nostrum e bulgâ est matris in lucem editus.

It is probable that Gr. βολβή, Lat. volva, vulva, the womb, is a kindred form, from another modification of the word for bubble, from which is also bulbus, a round or bubble-shaped root, or a root consisting of concentric skins.

In E. bellows, the word, like trowsers and other names of things consisting of a pair of principal members, has assumed a plural form.

To Belong. Du. langen, to reach, to attain; belangen, to attain to, to concern, to belong, attingere, attine're, pertinere, pervenire.—Kil. G. gelangen, to arrive at, to become one's property; zum Königreich gelangen, to come to the crown; belangen, to concern, to touch. Was das belanget, as concerning that.

To belong is thus to reach up to, to touch one, expressing the notion of property by a similar metaphor to the Lat. attinere, pertinere, to hold to one.

Belt. ON. belti; Lat. balteus; Gael. ball, border, belt, welt of a shoe; W. gwald, gwaldas, a border, hem, welt of a shoe.

Bench. See Bank.

To Bend. ON. benda; AS. bendan. Fr. bander un arc, to bend a bow; hence to exert force, se bander, to rise against external force; bandoir, a spring.

To bend sails is to stretch them on the yards of the vessel; to bend cloth, to stretch it on a frame, G. Tuch an einen Rahmen spannen. See Bind.

Beneath. See Nether.

Benediction. Lat. benedictio (bene, well, and dico, I say), a speaking well of one. Benedico, taken absolutely, means to use words of good omen, and with an accusative, to hallow, bless.

Benefice.—Benefactor.—Benefit. Lat. benefacere, to do good to one; benefactor, one who does good; benefactum, Fr. bienfait, a good deed, a benefit. The Lat. beneficium, a kindness, was in Mid. Lat. applied to an estate granted by the king or other lord to one for life, because it was held by the kindness of the lord.

'Villa quam Lupus quondam per beneficium nostrum tenere visus fuit.' 'Similiter villa quam ex munificentia nostrâ ipsi Caddono concessimus.' 'Quam fidelis noster per nostrum beneficium habere videtur.' The term had been previously applied in the Roman law to estates conferred by the prince upon soldiers and others.—Ducange. The same name was given to estates conferred upon clerical persons for life, for the performance of ecclesiastical services, and in modern times the name of benefice is appropriated to signify a piece of church preferment.

Benign.—Benignant. Lat. benignus (opposed to malignus), kind, generous, disposed to oblige.

Benison. OFr. beneison, benaigon, a blessing, from benedictio. Lat. benedicere, Fr. benir, to bless.

Bent. The flower-stalks of grass remaining uneaten in a pasture. Bav. bimaissen, bimpsen, binssen, G. binsen, rushes. OHG. pinoz, pinuz.

To Benum. See Numb.

Benzoin. Gum benjamin, Ptg. benjoim, Fr. benjoin, from Arab. loubân djâwî, incense of Java. By the Arabs it is called bakhour djâwî, Javanese perfume, or sometimes louban, by itself, or simply djâwî.—Dozy.

To Bequeath. To direct the disposition of property after one's death. AS. becwathan, from cwathan, to say. See Quoth.

To Beray. To dirty. 'I beraye, I fyle with ashes. I araye, or fyle with myre, J'emboue. I marre a thyng, I soyle it or araye it.'—Palsgr. From OFr. ray, dirt. 'Hic fimus, fens; et hic limus, ray.'—Commentary on Neccham in Nat.

Antiq. p. 113. Wall, ariierf to dirty. Esthon. roe, Fin. roju, dirt, dung; roju, roisto, rubbish, sweepings, dust; rojahtaa, to rattle down, fall with sound. So ro-pakka, mud, dirt; ropahtaa, to fall with noise.

To Bereave. AS. reafian, bereafian, to deprive of, to strip. See Reave, Rob.

Berry. A small eatable fruit. AS. beria; Goth. basja; Du. besje; Sanscr. bhakshya, food, from bhaksh, to eat. Hence on the one side Lat. bacca, a berry, and on the other Goth. basya, G. Beere, E. berry.—Kühn, Zeitschr. vol. vi. p. 3.

* Berth. The proper meaning of the word is shelter, but it is specially applied to the place boarded off in a ship for a person to lie in, or the space kept clear for a ship to ride or moor in. It is the same word with the provincial barth, a shelter for cattle.—Hal.

Devon. barthless, houseless. Warm barth under hedge is a succour to beast.—Tusser. The origin is AS. beorgan, E. dial. berwe, burwe, to defend, protect; burrow, sheltered from the wind. The final th in barth may be either the termination significative of an abstract noun, as in growth, from grow, lewth, shelter, from lew, stealth from steal; or, as I think more probable, barth may be for barf, a form which the verb takes in Yorkshire, barfham, compared with bargham, berwham, a horse collar, what protects the neck of the horse from the hames. So too Yorkshire arf, fearful, from AS. earg, earh, OE. arwe.

To Beseech. Formerly beseek. His heart is hard that will not melte When men of mekeness him beseke. Chaucer, R. R.

To seek something from a person, to entreat, solicit. So Lat. peto, to seek, and also to entreat, beseech.

Besom. AS. besem, besm; Pl.D. bessen, G. besen. AS. besmas, rods. In Devonshire the name bissam or bassam is given to the heath plant, because used for making besoms, as conversely a besom is called broom, from being made of broom-twigs. The proper meaning of the word seems twigs or rods. Du. brem-bessen, broom twigs, scopæ spartæ.—Biglotton.

Best. See Better.

Bestead. AS. stede, place, position. Hence stead is applied to signify the influences arising from relative position. To stand in stead of another is to perform the offices due from him; to stand one in good stead, or to bestead one, is to perform a serviceable office to him.

The dry fish was so new and good as it did very greatly bestead us in the whole course of our voyage.—Drake.

On the other hand, to be hard bestead is to be placed in a position which it is hard to endure.

To Bestow. AS. stow, a place; to bestow, to be-place, to give a place to, to lay out, to exercise on a definite object;

To Bet. From abet, in the sense of backing, encouraging, supporting the side on which the wager is laid.

* To Bete, Beit, Beet. To help, to supply, to mend.—Jam. To bete his bale, to remedy his misfortune; to bete a mister, to supply a want. To beet, to make of feed a fire.—Gl. Grose. AS. betan, to make better, improve, amend, restore; fyr betan, properly to mend the fire, but in practice, to make it. Tha het he micel fyr betan, then ordered he a great fire to be lighted: OSw: eld upbota, to light the fire; bal oppbota, to fire a funeral pile; botesward, the guardian of a beacon-fire; fyrbotare, one who sets fire to, an incendiary. Du. boeten, to amend, repair, make better; het vuur Boeten, to kindle the fire. The sense of mending the fire or supplying it with fuel might so easily pass into that of making or lighting it, that we can hardly doubt that the use of AS. betan, Sw. bota, Du. boeten, in the latter sense is only a special application of the same verbs in the general sense of repairing or making better, the origin of which is to be found in ON. bót, reparation, making better, Du. baete, advantage, profit, amendment, baet, bat, bet, more, better, preferably.—Kil.

On the other hand, it seems hard to separate AS. betan, Du. boeten, to set fire; Sw. fyrbotare, from It. buttafuoco, Fr. boutefeu, an incendiary, in the two last of which the verbal element must certainly be It. buttare, to cast, to thrust, Fr. bouter, to thrust, put, put forth. Bouter feu would thus be to set fire to, as bouter selle, to put on the saddle. Sw. bota was also used in the sense of parrying or pushing aside a thrust aimed at one.—Ihre. The question then arises whether both derivations may not be reconciled by supposing that ON. bót, reparation, and Du. baete, advantage, amendment, may be derived from the notion of pushing forwards. Goth. hva boteith mannan, what does it boot, what does it better a man, might have been translated, what does it advance a man, what does it forward him.
It is naught honest, it may not advance For to have dealing with such base poraille.
Chaucer, Friar's Prol.
The word advantage literally signifies furtherance, the being pushed to the front, and the same idea is involved in the word profit, from Lat. proficere, to make forwards, advance, progress. To boot in coursing (i. e. to give something over and above in an exchange) is translated by Palsgrave, bouter davantaige. Thus the radical meaning of better would be more in advance, and to bete or repair would be to push up to its former place something that had fallen back.
To Beteem, to Teem; To vouchsafe, deign, afford, deem suitable, find in one's heart.
Yet could he not beteem (dignetur) The shape of other bird than eagle for to seem.
Golding's Ovid in R.
'Ah, said he, thou hast confessed and bewrayed all, I could beteem it to rend thee in pieces.'—Dialogue on Witches, Percy Soc. x. 88.
In a like sense ON. tima, Pl.D. taemen, tamen, Ober D. zemen. ON. Tima eigi at lata eit, not to have the heart to give up a thing. Pl.D. Ik tame mi dat nig; I do not allow myself that. He tamet sik een good glas wien : he allows himself a good glass of wine. Bav. Mich zimet, gezimet eines dinges, I approve of a thing, find it good: Goth. gatiman, G. ziemen, gesiemen, Du. taemen, betaemen, to beseem, become, be fitting or suitable.
The sense of being fitting or suitable springs from ON. tima, to happen, to fall to one's lot, in the same way that schicklich, suitable, springs from schicken, to appoint, order, dispose (whence schicksal, fate, lot). On the same principle ON. fallinn, fitting, suitable, as one would have it fall, from falla, to fall, to happen.
To Betray. Lat. tradere, to deliver up, then to deliver up what ought to be kept, to deliver up in breach of trust, to betray. Hence It. tradire, Fr. trahir, as envahir, from invadere. The inflections of Fr. verbs in ir with a double ss, as trahissons, trahissais, are commonly rendered in E. by a final sh. Thus from ebahir, ébahissais, E. abash; from polir, polissais, E. polish, &c. In like manner from trahir we formerly had trash and betrash, as from obéir, obéissais, obeish.
In the water anon was seen His nose, his mouth, his eyen sheen. And he thereof was all abashed His owne shadow had him betrashed.—R. R.

In the original— Et il maintenant s'ebahit Car son umbre si le trahit.
Her acquaintance is perilous First soft and after noious. She hath The trashid [trahie] without wene.
Probably the unusual addition of the particle be to a verb imported from the Fr. was caused by the accidental resemblance of the word to Du. bedriegen, G. betrügen, to deceive, to cheat, which are from a totally different root. From It. tradire is traditor, Fr. traître, a traitor; and from Fr. trahir, trahison, treachery, treason.
Better.—Best. Goth. batizo, batista; AS. betera, betest, betst, better, best. Du. bat, bet, baet, better, more, OE. bet, better. See To Bete.
Between.—Betwixt. The AS. has tweoh, a different form of twa, two, and thence twegen, twain. From the former of these are AS. betwuh, betweoh, betweox, betwuxt, by two, in the middle of two, which may be compared as to form with amid, AS. amiddes, amidst, or with again, against. In like manner from twain is formed between, in the middle of twain.
The Ile of Man that me clepeth Betwene us and Irlonde.—R. G.
Bevel. Slant, sloped off, awry. Fr. béveau, an instrument opening like a pair of compasses, for measuring angles. Buvéau, a square-like instrument having moveable and compass branches, or one branch compass and the other straight. Some call it a bevel.—Cot.
Beverage. A drink. Lat. bibere, It. bevere, to drink; whence beveraggio; Fr. beuvrage; E. beverage.
Bevy. It. beva, a drinking; a bevy, as of pheasants.—Fl. Fr. bevée, a brood, flock, of quails, larks, roebucks, thence applied to a company of ladies especially.
To Bewray. Goth. vrohjan, Fris. wrogia, ruogia, wreia, G. rügen, to accuse, i. e. to bring an offence to the notice of the authorities. Sw. röja, to discover, make manifest. Dit tungomal röjer dig, thy speech bewrayeth thee, i. e. makes it manifest that thou art a Galilean. Det röjer sig sjelft, it bewrays itself, gives some sign of existence which attracts notice. Now the stirring of an object is the way in which it generally catches our attention. Hence G. regen, to stir, is used for the last evidence of life. Regt kein leben mehr in dir, are there no signs of life in you? Die Liebe reget sich bei ihm, love begins to stir in him, shows the first signs of life in him. Pl.D. wrogen, rogen (in Altmark röjen), to stir. 'Hi-rannetho handelende nah wroginge öhrer conscientien:' herein to deal according to the stirring of their conscience.—Brem. Wtb. He rögt un bögt sik nig, he is stock still. Uprogen, to stir up; beregen, sik beregen, to move, to stir.—Schütze. The train of thought is then, to stir, to give signs of life, make manifest his presence, to make evident, bring under notice, reveal, discover, accuse. 'Thy tongue bewrayeth thee:' thy tongue makes thy Galilean birth to stir as it were before the eyes, le fait sauter aux yeux (according to the Fr. metaphor), makes it evident to sense, convicts thee of being a Galilean. E. dial, rogge, roggle, Pl.D. wraggeln, to shake. See Wriggle.

Bezel.—Basil. Sp. bisel, the basil edge of a plate of looking-glass, which were formerly ornamented with a border ground slanting from the general surface of the glass. When the edge of a joiner's tool is ground away to an angle it is called a basil (Halliwell), in Fr. taillé en biseau. Biseau, a bezle, bezling or skewing.—Cot. The proper meaning of the word seems to be a paring, then an edge pared or sliced off, a sloping edge. Tayllet le payn ke est parée, Les biseaux (the paringes) à l'amoyne soyt doné. Bibelsworth in Nat. Ant. 172.

Bezoar. A stony concretion in the stomach of ruminants to which great medical virtues were formerly attached. Pers. pâdzahr, from pâd-, expelling or preserving against, and zahr, poison. In Arab, the word became bâdizahr, bâzahr.—Dozy.

To Bezzle. To drink hard, to tipple. Probably, like guzzle, formed from an imitation of the sound made in greedy eating and drinking. Yes, s'foot I wonder how the inside of a taverne looks now. Oh! when shall I bizzle, bizzle?—Dekker in R.

Bi-. Lat. bis, twice, in two ways; for duis, from duo, two, as bellum for duellum. In comp. it becomes bi-, as in Biped, two-footed. Bisect, to cut in two.

Bias. Fr. biais, bihais. Cat. biax, Sardin. biascia. It. sbiescio, Piedm. sbias, sloped, slanting; Fr. biaiser, Sard. sbiasciai, to do something aslant. The It. bieco, sbieco, from obliquus, has a singular resemblance to sbiescio, used in precisely the same sense, though such a change of form would be very unusual. The true origin is probably from the notion of sliding or slipping. It. sbiagio, sbiesso, bending, aslope; sbisciare, bisciare, sbrisciare, sbrissare, to creep or crawl sideling, aslope, or in and out, as an eel or a snake, to glide or slip as upon ice; sbriscio, sbrisso, sbiscio, oblique, crooked, winding or crawling in and out, slippery, sliding; biascio, bias-wise.

Bib. Fr. bavou, baviere, baverole, a cloth to prevent a child drivelling over its clothes. Baver, to slaver or drivel. Du. kwijlen, to slaver; kwijl-bab, kwijl-lap, or kwijl-slab, a slabbering-bib. Fris. babbi, the mouth; Mantuan, babbi, babble, snout, lips.

To Bib.—To Bibble. Lat. bibo, to drink, whence Du. biberen, to drink much; biberer, Fr. biberon, bibaculus, a bibber, one who drinks in excess. OE. bibble, Sc. bebble, to sip, to tipple. 'An excellent good bibbeler, specially in a bottle.'—Gascoigne. 'He's aye bebbling and drinking.'—Jam. Dan. dial. bible, to trickle. 'Han er saa beskjenket at brandevinet bibler oven ud av ham:' he is so drunk that the brandy runs out of him. Dan. pible, to purl, to well up with small bubbles and a soft sound.

Bible. Gr. βίβλος, a book; originally, an Egyptian plant, the papyrus, of the bark of which paper was first made.

Bice. An inferior blue, OE. asure-bice (Early E. Misc. Hal. 78); Fr. bes-azur, the particle bes being often used in composition to signify perversion, inferiority. Prov. beslei, perverted belief; barlume (for bis-lume) weak light; Piedm. besanca, crooked; berlaita (for bes-laita), Fr. petit-lait, whey; Cat. bescompte, miscount; Fr. bestemps, foul weather. Dict. Wallon.

To Bicker.—Bickering. To skirmish, dispute, wrangle. It is especially applied in Sc. to a fight with stones, and also signifies the constant motion of weapons and the rapid succession of strokes in a battle or broil, or the noise occasioned by successive strokes, by throwing of stones, or by any rapid motion.—Jamieson. The origin is probably the representation of the sound of a blow with a pointed instrument by the syllable pick, whence the frequentative picker or bicker would represent a succession of such blows. To bicker in NE. is explained to clatter, Halliwell. Du. bickeler, a stone-hewer or stone-picker; bickelen, bicken, to hew stone; bickel, bickel-steenken, a fragment of stone, a chip, explaining the Sc. bicker in the sense of throwing stones. Bickelen, to start out, as tears from the eyes, from the way in which a chip flies from the pick. Hence Sc. to bicker, to move quickly.—Jam.
Ynglis archaris that hardy war and wycht Amang the Scottis bykarit with all their mycht. Wallace in Jam.
The arrows struck upon them like blows from a stone-cutter's pick.
It must be observed that the word pick (equivalent to the modern pitch) was used for the cast of an arrow.
I hold you a grote I pycke as farre with an arowe as you.—Palsgrave in Halliwell.
To Bid. Two verbs are here confounded, of distinct form in the other Teutonic languages.
1. To Bid in the obsolete sense of to pray.
For far lever he hadde wende And bidde ys mete yf he shulde in a strange lond. R. G. Bidders and beggars are used as synonymous in P. P.
For he that beggcth other biddeth but if he have need He is false and faitour and defraudeth the neede.
In this sense the word is the correlative of Goth. bidjan, bidan, bath, or bad, bedun; AS. biddan, bæd, gebeden; G. bitten, bat; ON. bidja, or, in a reflective form, beidast.
2. To Bid in the sense of offering, bringing forwards, pressing on one's notice, and consequently ordering or requiring something to be done. Goth. bjudan in anabjudan, faurbjudan, to command, forbid; AS. beodan, bead, geboden; G. bieten, to offer, verbieten, to forbid; Du. bieden, porrigere, offerre, praebere, praestare.—Kil.
To bid the banns, G. ein paar verlobte aufbieten, is to bring forwards the announcement of a marriage, to offer it to public notice. Einem einen guten tag bieten, to bid one good day, to offer one the wish of a good day. To bid one to a dinner is properly the same verb, to propose to one to come to dinner, although it might well be understood in the sense of the other form of the verb, to ask, to pray one to dinner. Analogous expressions are G. einen vor Gericht bieten, to summon one before a court of justice; einen vor sich bieten lassen, to have one called before him.
With respect to logical pedigree, the meaning of bid, in the sense of ask for, pray, may plausibly be derived from Goth. beidan, AS. bidan, abidan, to look for. To pray is merely to make known the fact that we look for or desire the object of our prayers. The Lat. peto, quæro, signifying in the first instance to seek or look for, are also used in the sense of asking for. The ON. leita is used in each sense (Ihrev. Leta), and the Sw. has leta, to look for, anleta, to solicit, just as the two ideas are expressed in E. by seek and beseech, for be-seek. The ON. bidill, a suitor, from bidja, to ask, seems essentially the same word with AS. bidel, an attendant or beadle, from bidan, to abide or wait on.
Big. Swollen, bulky. The original spelling seems to be bug, which is still used in the N. of England for swollen, proud, swaggering.
But when her circling nearer down doth pull Then gins she swell and waxen bug with horn. More in Richardson.
'Bug as a Lord.'—Halliwell. 'Big-swollen heart.'—Addison. 'Big-uddered ewes.'—Pope in R.
The original form of the root is probably seen in the ON. bolga, a swelling, bolginn, swoln, from belgia, to inflate; E. bulge, to belly, to swell, bilge or bulge, the belly of a ship, related to big or bug, as G. and Gael. balg, an entire skin, to E. bag. The loss of the l gives Dan. bug, belly, bulge, bow; bugne (answering to ON. bolgna), to bulge, belly, bend. Compare also Sp. buque with E. bulk. W. bog, swelling, rising up.
To Big. AS. byggan, ON. byggia, to build, to inhabit; OSw. bygga, to prepare, repair, build, inhabit. A simpler and probably a contracted form is seen in ON. bua, OSw. boa, bo, to arrange, prepare, cultivate, inhabit; Du. bouwen, to cultivate, to build; G. bauen to cultivate, to dwell, to build.
Bigamy. From Gr. δις, twice, becoming in Lat. bis and in comp. bi-, and γαμεω, to marry.
Bight or Bought. A bend of a shore or of a rope. ON. bugt, a flexure, buga, to bend, to curve. AS. bugan, bigan; G. biegen, to bend.
Bigot. The beginning of the 13th century saw the sudden rise and maturity of the mendicant orders of St Francis and St Dominic. These admitted into the ranks of their followers, besides the professed monks and nuns, a third class, called the tertiary order, or third order of penitence, consisting both of men and women, who, without necessarily quitting their secular avocations, bound themselves to a strict life and works of charity. The same outburst of religious feeling seems to have led other persons, both men and women, to adopt a similar course of life. They wore a similar dress, and went about reading the Scriptures and practising Christian life, but as they subjected themselves to no regular orders or vows of obedience, they became highly obnoxious to the hierarchy, and underwent much obloquy and persecution. They adopted the grey habit of the Franciscans, and were popularly confounded with the third order of those friars under the names of Beguini, Beguttae, Bizocchi, Bizzocari (in Italian Beghini, Bighini, Bighiotti), all apparently derived from Ital. bigio, Venet. biso, grey. 'Bizocco,' says an author quoted in N. and Q. vol. ix. 560, 'sia quasi bigioco e bigiotto, perchè i Terziari di S. Francesco si veston di bigio.' So in France they were called les petits frères bis or bisets.—Ducange. From bigio, grey, was formed bigello, the dusky hue of a dark-coloured sheep, and the coarse cloth made from its undyed wool, and this was probably also the meaning of bighino or beguino, as well as bizocco. 'E che l'abito bigio ovver beghino era comune degli uomini di penitenza,' where beghino evidently implies a description of dress of a similar nature to that designated by the term bigio. Bizocco also is mentioned in the fragment of the history of Rome of the 14th century in a way which shows that it must have signified coarse, dark-coloured cloth, such as is used for the dress of the inferior orders, probably from biso, the other form of bigio. 'Per te Tribuno,' says one of the nobles to Rienzi, 'fora piu convenevole che portassi vestimenta honeste da bizuoco che queste pompose,' translated by Muratori, 'honesti plebeii amictus.' It must be remarked that bizocco also signifies rude, clownish, rustical, apparently from the dress of rustics being composed of bizocco. In the same way Fr. bureau is the colour of a brown sheep, and the coarse cloth made from the undyed wool. Hence the OE. borel, coarse woollen cloth, and also unlearned common men. In a similar manner from bigello, natural grey or sheep's russet, homespun cloth, bighellone, a dunce, a blockhead.—Flor. From bigio would naturally be formed bigiotto, bighiotto; and as soon as the radical meaning of the word was obscured, corruption would easily creep in, and hence the variations bigutta, begutta, bigotta, beghino, which must not be confounded with begardo,

bigardo, G. beghart, signifying bagmen or beggars, a term of reproach applied to the same class of people. We find Boniface VIII., in the quotations of Ducange and his continuators, speaking of them as 'Nonnulli viri pestiferi qui vulgariter Fraticelli seu fratres de paupere vita, aut Bizochi sive Bighini vel aliis fucatis nominibus nuncupantur.' Matthew Paris, with reference to A.D. 1243, says, 'Eisdem temporibus quidam in Alemannia praecipue se asserentes religiosos in utroque sexu, sed maximè in muliebri, habitum religionis sed levem susceperunt, continentiam vitae privato voto profitentes, sub nullius tamen regula coarctati, nec adhuc ullo claustro contenti.' They were however by no means confined to Italy. 'Istis ultimis temporibus hypocritalibus plurimi maximè in Italia et Alemannia et Provinciae provincia, ubi tales Begardi et Beguini vocantur, nolentes jugum subire verae obedientiae—nec servare regulam aliquam ab Ecclesia approbatam sub manu praeceptoris et ducis legitimi, vocati Fraticelli, alii de paupere vita, alii Apostolici, aliqui Begardi, qui ortum in Alemannia habuerunt.'—Alvarus Pelagius in Duc. 'Secta quaedam pestifera illorum qui Beguini vulgariter appellantur qui se fratres pauperes de tertio ordine S. Francisci communiter appellabant.'—Bernardus Guidonis in vita Joh. XXII. 'Capellamque seu clusam hujusmodi censibus et redditibus pro septem personis religiosis, Beguttis videlicet ordinis S. Augustini dotarint.'—Chart. A.D. 1318. 'Beghardus et Beguina et Begutta sunt viri et mulieres tertii ordinis.'—Breviloquium in Duc. They are described more at large in the Acts of the Council of Treves, A.D. 1310. 'Item cum quidam sint laici in civitate et provincia Trevirensi qui sub pretextu cujusdam religionis fictae Beghardos se appellant, cum tabardis et tunicis longis et longis capuciis cum otio incedentes, ac labores manuum detestantes, conventicula inter se aliquibus temporibus faciunt, seque fingunt coram simplicibus personis expositores sacrarum scripturarum, nos vitam eorum qui extra religionem approbatam validam mendicantes discurrunt, &c.' 'Nonnullae mulieres sive sorores, Biguttae apud vulgares nuncupatae, absque votorum religionis emissione.'—Chart. A.D. 1499. From the foregoing extracts it will readily be understood how easily the name, by which these secular aspirants to superior holiness of life were designated, might be taken to express a hypocrite, false pretender to religious feeling, Tartuffe. Thus we find in It. *bigotto*, *bizocco*, a devotee, a hypocrite; Piedmontese *bigot*, *bisoch*, Fr. *bigot*, in the same sense. Sp. *bigardo*, a name given to a person of religion leading a loose life, *bigardia*, deceit, dissimulation; G. *beghart*, *gleischner* (Frisch), a bigot or hypocrite, a false pretender to honesty or holiness.—Ludwig. '*Bigin*, *bigot*, superstitious hypocrite.'—Speight in Richardson.

In English the meaning has received a further development, and as persons professing extraordinary zeal for religious views are apt to attribute an overweening importance to their particular tenets, a bigot has come to signify a person unreasonably attached to particular opinions, and not having his mind open to any argument in opposition.

Bilberry. The fruit of the *vaccinium myrtillus*, while that of *vaccinium uliginosum* is called in the N. of E. *bla-berry*, from the dark colour. Dan. *blaa*, blue; Sw. *blamand*, a negro. In Danish the names are reversed, as the fruit of the *myrtillus* is called *blaa-bær*, that of the *uliginosum bœlle-bær*. Perhaps the name may be a corruption of *bull-berry*, in accordance with the general custom of naming eatable berries after some animal, as *craneberry*, *crowberry*, and the bilberry itself was called by the Saxons *hart-berry*. *Aurelles*, *whortle-berries*, *bill-berries*, *bull-berries*.—Cot.

Bilbo. A slang term for a sword, now obsolete. A *Bilboa* blade.

Bilboes. Among mariners, a punishment at sea when the offender is laid in irons or set in a kind of stocks. Du. *boeye*, a shackle. Lat. *boja*, Prov. *boia*, OFr. *buie*, fetters. *Bojæ*, genus *vinculorum tam ferreæ quam ligneæ*.—Festus in Diez. This leaves the first syllable unaccounted for. The proper meaning of *boja*, however, seems to be rather the clog to which the fetters are fastened than the fetter itself. NFris. *bui*, buoy [i. e. a floating log to mark the place of something sunk], clog to a fetter.—Deutsch. Mundart. Johansen, p. 101.

Bilge. The belly or swelling side of a ship. See *Bulk*.

To Bilk. To defraud one of expected remuneration; a slang term most likely from an affected pronunciation of *balk*.

Bill. I. An instrument for hewing. G. *beil*, an axe; AS. *bil*, a sword, axe, weapon; Sw. *bila*, an axe, *plog-bill*, a plough-share; Du. *bille*, a stonemason's pick; *billen den molen-steen*, to pick a millstone.—Kil. W. *bwyell*, an axe, a hatchet. Gael. *buail*, to strike.

2. The bill of a bird may very likely be radically identical with the foregoing. The Du. *bicken* is used both of a bird pecking and of hewing stone with a pick; *bicken* or *billen den molensteen*. AS. *bile*, the bill of a bird, horn of an animal. In the same way are related Pol. *dziob*, the beak of a bird, *dziobad*, to peck, to job, and *dziobas*, an adze; Bohem. *top*, a beak, *tepati*, to strike, *topor*, an axe.

Bill. 3.—*Billet*. A bill, in the sense of a writing, used in legal proceedings, as a bill of indictment, bill of exchange, bill in parliament, is properly a sealed instrument, from Mid.Lat. *bulla*, a seal. See *Bull*. A billet is the diminutive of this, a short note, the note which appoints a soldier his quarters. Du. *bullet*, *billet*, *inscriptum*, *symbolum*, *syngraphum*.—Kil.

*Billet*. 2.—*Billiard*. Fr. *billot*, a stick or log of wood cut for fuel, an ingot of gold or silver. *Bille*, an ingot, a young stock of a tree to graft on—Cotgrave; a stick to rest on—Roquefort. Langued. *bilio*, a stick to tighten the cord of a package. Fr. *billard* or *billart*, a short and thick truncheon or cudgel, hence the cudgel in the play at trap; and a *billard*, or the stick wherewith we touch the ball at billiards. OFr. *billard* also signified a man who rests on a stick in walking.—Roquef. *Billette*, a billet of wood; *billeites d'un espieu*, the cross bars near the head of a boarspear to hinder it from running too far into the animal.

The origin of the term is probably from *bole*, the trunk of a tree, the o changing to an i to express diminution. A like change takes place in the other sense of *billet* from *bulla*, a seal.

Billow. Sw. *bölja*, Dan. *bölge*, ON. *bylgia*, Du. *bolghe*, *bulghe*, *fluctus maris*, *unda*, *procella*—Kil., from OSw. *bulgja*, to swell. Du. *belghen*, AS. *belgan*, *abelgan*, to be angry (i. e. to swell with rage).

The mariner amid the swelling seas Who seeth his back with many a billow beaten. Gascoigne in R.

'Had much ado to prevent one from sinking, the *billowe* was so great' (Hackluyt), where we see *billow* not used in the sense of an individual wave, but in that of swell.

So in Gr. *οἴδημα θαλάσσης*, the swelling of the sea, and in Lat. '*tumidi fluctus*,'

'tumens æquor,' and the like, are commonplaces. See Belly.

Bin.—Bing. The proper meaning is a heap. Like ants when they do spoil the bing of corn. Surrey in R.

Then as side boards or walls were added to confine the heap to a smaller space, the word was transferred to a receptacle so constructed for storing corn, wine, &c. Sw. binge, a heap, a division in a granary, or bin. ON. bunga, to swell, to bulge, bunki, a heap. Fr. bigne, a bump or knob.

The grete bing was upbeildid wele Of aik trees and fyrren schydis dry.—D. V.

To Bind.—Bine.—Bindweed. AS. bindan, Goth. bindan, band, bundun. This word is I believe derived from the notion of a bunch or lump, expressed by Sw. bunt, Dan. bundt, G. bund, a bunch, truss, bundle, the primary notion of binding being thus to make a bunch of a thing, to fasten it together. In like manner from knot, Lat. nodus, a knob, I would derive the verb to knit, to bind together, as when we speak of one's limbs being firmly knit together. The idea which is expressed in E. by the verb knit or net, i. e. to form a knotted structure, is rendered in ON. by binda, to bind ; at binda nát, to knot nets for fish, to net. Lith. pinnu, pinti, to wreathe, to plait. It seems more in accordance with the development of the understanding that the form with the thinner vowel and abstract signification should be derived from that with the broader vowel and concrete signification, than vice versâ. Thus I suppose the Gr. δέμω, to build, to be derived from δόμος, a house, Lat. pendere, to hang, from pondus, a weight, the last of these forms being identical with the word which we are treating as the root of bind, viz. bund, bundt, bunch. Lith. pundas, a truss, bundle, also a stone weight, a weight of 48 pounds. The original meaning of pondus would thus be simply a lump of some heavy material, doubtless a stone.

The term bine or bind is applied to the twining stem of climbing plants. Thus we speak of the hop-bine for the shoots of hops. The wood-bine designates the honeysuckle in England, while bind-wood, bin-wood, or ben-wood, is in Scotland applied to ivy. Here we see the root in the precise form of the Lith. pinnu, pin-ti, to twine.

Binnacle. See Bittacle.

Bio. Gr. βίος, life.

Birch. AS. birce; Sw. björk; Lith. beržas (= Fr. j), Sanscr. bhurja.

Bird. AS. brid, the young of birds; earnes brid, an eagle's young; G. brut, a brood or hatch of young. See Breed. We find the use of the word in this original sense as late as Shakespeare.
Being fed by us you used us so As that ungentle gull the cuckoo's bird Useth the sparrow.—H. IV., v. sc. i.

The proper designation of the feathered creation is in E. fowl, which in course of time was specially applied to the gallinaceous tribe as the most important kind of bird for domestic use, and it was perhaps this appropriation of the word which led to the adoption of the name of the young animal as the general designation of the race. A similar transfer of meaning has taken place in the case of pigeon, from Ital. pippione, piccione, properly a young pigeon, and of Fr. poule, a gallinaceous bird, E. poultry, from Lat. pullus, the young of an animal.

Birth. AS. beorth, Sw. börd, G. geburt, from AS. beran, to bear, to bring forth. See To Bear.

Biscuit. Fr. biscuit. It. biscotto, Lat. bis-coctus (bis and coquo, to cook), twice cooked, or baked.

Bishop. Lat. episcopus, from Gr. ἐπίσκοπος, an overseer, overlooker. When compared with Fr. évêque, it affords a remarkable proof how utterly unlike the immediate descendants of the same word in different languages may become. Episcopus; It. vescovo, Fr. évêque.

Bisson.—Bisom.—Bisen.—Bizened. Blind, properly near-sighted. Du. bij sien, propius videre; bij siende, bij sienigh, lusciosus et myops, qui nisi propius admota non videt.—Kil.

Bit. The part of the bridle which the horse bites or holds in his mouth. AS. bitol. ON. bitill, beitsl. Sw. betsel.

Bitch. AS. bicce; ON. bikkia, a little dog, a bitch; applied also to other animals, and especially to a small poor horse. G. betze, or petze, a bitch, in Swabia, a pig; petz, a bear. Fr. biche, a hind or female stag. Something of the same confusion is seen in G. hündinn, a female dog; hindinn, a female stag. Lap. pittjo, a bitch.

To Bite. Goth. beitan, ON. bita, G. beissen.

Bittacle or Binnacle. A frame of timber in the steerage of a ship, where the compass stands.—Bailey. Fr. habitacle, Sp. bitacora. Habitacle, a habit-

Habitacle, dwelling or abiding place.—Cotgr. In Legrand's Fr. and Flemish dictionary habitacle is explained a little lodge (logement) near the mizenmast for the pilot and steersman. ' Nagt huis, 't huisje, 't kompas huis.' It would thus seem to have signified, first, a shelter for the steersman, then the mere case in which the compass is placed.

Bitter. Goth. baitrs, ON. beitr, bitr, apparently from its biting the tongue.
Peper æer bitter och bitar fast.
Pepper is bitter and bites hard.—Hist. Alex. Mag., quoted by Ihre. Applied in ON. to the sharpness of a weapon. 'Hin bitrasta sverd'—the sharpest sword. When an edge is blunt we say it will not bite.
In a similar manner Gael. beum, bite, cut, and beum, bitter.

Bittern. A bird of the heron tribe. It. bittore; Fr. butor; OE. bittour. Sp. bitor, a rail.

Bitts. The bitts of the anchor, Fr. bites, Sp. bitas, are two strong posts standing up on the deck, round which the cable is made fast. ON. biti, a beam in a house or ship, a mast; Sp. bitones, pins of the capstan.

Bivouac. The lying out of an army in the open field without shelter. G. bei-wache, an additional watch, from wachen, to watch, corrupted in Fr. to bivouac, from whence we have adopted the term. But we formerly had the word direct from German in a sense nearer the original. 'Biovac, bihovac, a night guard performed by the whole army when there is apprehension of danger.—Bailey. Sp. vivac, town guard to keep order at night; bivouac, night guard, small guard-house.—Neumann.

To Blab—Blabber.—Blabber-lip. To blab, to talk much, indistinctly, to chatter; then to talk indiscreetly, to let out what should have been concealed. I blaber, as a childe dothe or he can speake, Je gasouille.—Palsgr.
Why presumest thou so proudly to profecie these things And wost no more what thou blaberest than Ba-laam's asse.—Halliwell.
Dan. blabbre, to babble, gabble. Pl.D. blabbern, G. plappern, to speak quick, confusedly, thoughtlessly; Bohem. blep-tati, to babble, chatter; Lith. blebberis, a babbler; Gael. blabaran, a stammerer, stutterer, blabhdach, babbling, garrulous. All founded on a representation of the sound made by collision of the lips in rapid talking. The Gael. plab is used to signify 'a soft noise, as of a body falling into water, or water beating gently on the beach;' plabraich, a fluttering noise, a flapping, as of wings; plabartaich, a continued soft sound, as of water gently beating the shore, unintelligible talk; plabair, a babbler.—Armstrong.
The introduction or omission of an l after the labial in these imitative forms makes little difference, as is seen in sputter and splutter. So Fr. baboyer, to blabber with the lips.—Cotgr. To blabber out the tongue, to loll it out.—Hal. Blab-ber-lip, synonymous with baber-lip, a large coarse lip; blob, parallel with Fris. babbe, Mantuan babbi, a large lip, mouth, chops.
Wit hung her blob, even humour seemed to mourn.—Collins in Hal.
Gael. blob, blobach, blubber-lipped. Bav. bleff, chops, mouth, in contempt.—Deutsch. Mund. v. 332.

Black, Bleak. The original meaning of black seems to have been exactly the reverse of the present sense, viz. shining, white. It is in fact radically identical with Fr. blanc, white, blank, from which it differs only in the absence of the nasal.
ON. blakki, shine, whiteness (candor sine macula.—Hald.). It. biacca, white lead.
Then as white is contrasted with any special colour the word came to signify pale, faded. AS. blac-hleor ides, the pale-cheeked maid. Se mona mid his blacan leohte; the moon with her pale light.
G. bleich, Du. bleek, Dan. bleg, pale. N. blakk, pale, faded, discoloured; gulblakk, brunblakk, pale yellow, buff, pale brown; Sw. black, whitish, yellowish, fallow; ON. bleikr, light-coloured, whitish, pale, pale yellow; NE. blake, yellow; 'as blake as a paigle (cowslip).'
A fildefare ful eerly tok hir flihte, To fore my study sang with his fetheris blake.
Lydgate, Percy Soc. x, 156.
Fieldfare, AS. fealo-for, troxafealo, fallow fawn-coloured.
Again, as colours fade away the aspect of the object becomes indistinct and obscure, and thus the idea of discolouration merges in that of dim, dusky, dark, on the one side, as in that of pale and white on the other. ON. blackr is translated 'glaucus seu subalbus,' by Gudmund; 'fuscus, obscurus,' by Haldorsen. In like manner E. bleak is used to signify pale or light-coloured as well as livid or dark-coloured. Fr. blesmer, to wax pale or bleak or swart a thing by displaying it in the hot sun.—Cot. Bleak of colour, pallido, livido ; to bleak in the sun, imbrunire.—Torriano. Sw. black, whitish, also tanned by the sun; mus-blackt, mouse-dun. When the idea of dimness or obscurity is pushed to its limit it becomes absolute darkness or blackness. There is nothing more variable than the signification of words designating colour.

Blackguard. A name originally given in derision to the lowest class of menials or hangers-on about a court or great household, as scullions, linkboys, and others engaged in dirty work.

A slave that within this twenty years rode with the Black Guard in the Duke's carriage (i. e. with the Duke's baggage) mongst spits and dripping-pans.—Webster.

I am degraded from a cook, and I fear that the Devil himself will entertain me but for one of his blackguard, and he shall be sure to have his meat burnt.—O. Play in Nares.

The word is well explained in a proclamation of the Board of Green Cloth in 1683, cited in N. and Q., Jan. 7, 1854.

Whereas of late a sort of vicious idle and masterless boys and rogues, commonly called the Black-guard, with divers other lewd and loose fellows, vagabonds, vagrants, and wandering men and women, do follow the Court to the great dishonour of the same—We do strictly charge all those so called the Blackguard as aforesaid, with all other loose idle masterless men, boys, rogues and wanderers, who have intruded themselves into his Majesty's court and stables, that within the space of 24 hours they depart.

Bladder. AS. blædre, ON. blaðra, a bubble, blister, bladder ; Sw. bladdra, a bubble, G. blatter, a pustule ; Bav. blatter, bubble, blister, bladder. The radical image is the formation of foam or bubbles by the dashing of water, and the sense is carried on from a bubble to any bubble-shaped thing, a bladder or pustule. Pl. D. pladdern, to dabble in water, and thence to babble, tattle. Dan. pluddre, to puddle or mix up turf and water ; to jabber ; pludder, mud, slush, mire, also jabber, gabble. The primitive sense of splashing in water is lost in ON. blaðra, to jabber, Sc. bladder, blather, blether, chatter, foolish talk, but it may be supplied from the constant connection between words expressing excessive talk, and the agitation of liquids. Besides the examples of this connection given above, the ON. skola and thwatta, and G. waschen, all signify to wash as well as to tattle, chatter. Du. borrelen, to bubble, to purl, is identical with Flanders borlen, to vociferate.—Kil. See Blubber.

Blade. ON. blað, the leaf of a tree, blade of a sword, or of an oar ; G. blatt, leaf of a tree, sheet of paper, flap of a coat, &c. ; Du. blad, a leaf, plate, board. The term is generally applied to anything thin and flat. It is commonly connected with plat, It. piatto, Fr. plat, Du. G. plat, Gr. πλατύς, broad. But perhaps a more definite origin may be found in the notion of foam, or a mass of bubbles, which we have above endeavoured to indicate as the original signification of Bladder. The old Dutch form of the word is blader, a leaf, bladeren, leaves, branches ; G. blatterig, leafy. And we have in foam a most complete example of leafy structure.

Blain. AS. blegen, Dan. blegne, Du. blein, Sw. dial. blena, a boil, pimple, blister. Perhaps from blegen, which Schwenk and Adelung give as an old Swabian form of the G. blähen, to blow.

Blame.—Blaspheme. Gr. βλασφημεῖν, to speak impiously. Lat. blasphemare, to revile, reproach, defame. Hence Ital. biasimare, Fr. blasmer, and E. blame.

Et per consilium eorum ita convenienter tibi respondebo quod cum tecum loquar non credo te me inde blasphematurum.—Eadmer, Hist. Novorum, p. 86.

Que quand je parle avec vous je ne crois pas que vous m'en blamiez.

Blank.—Blanch. Fr. blanc, white; blanchir, to blanch, to make or become white ; blanc, blanque, a blank ticket, a white or unwritten ticket, a ticket that does not obtain the prize. Hence applied to an occasion on which the result hoped for has not happened. Blank verse, verse void of the rhyme to which the ear is accustomed. To blank, or blanch, to disappoint, to omit, pass over.

Now, Sir, concerning your travels—I suppose you will not blanch Paris in your way.—Reliqu. Wott. in R. The judges of that time thought it a dangerous thing to admit if's and an's to qualify the words of treason, whereby every man might express his malice and blanch his danger.—Bacon in R.

The original root of the word is seen in the G. blinken, to shine, to glitter, as Lat. candidus, white, from candere, to shine, to glow. Dan. blank, shining, polished.

Blanket. From being made of white woollen cloth. Fr. blanchet, a blanket for a bed, also white woollen cloth ; blanchet, whitish.—Cot.

To Blare.—Blatter.—Blatant. To roar, to bellow. Du. blaeren, probably contracted from bladeren, as blader, blaere, a bubble, blister, or as E. smother, smore, Du. modder, moere, mud. The present forms then should be classed with blether, blather, bladder, the origin of which has been explained under Bladder.
Gael, blaodhrach, blorach, bawling, clamorous, noisy ; blor, a loud noise, a voice ; Ir. blaodh, a shout.
A parallel form sounds the radical syllable with a t instead of d. Du. blaeteren, blaeten, blaterare, stultè loqui, proflare fastum ; blast, blatero, ventosus, magniloquus.—Kil. Hence Spenser's blatant beast, the noisy, boasting, ill-speaking beast. 'She roade at peace through his only pains and excellent endurance, however envy list to blatter against him.'—Spenser. With inversion of the liquid, Sp. baladrar, to bellow, to talk much and loud ; baladron, OE. blateroon, an empty boaster.
Blast. A gust of wind. AS. blæsan, to blow ; blæst, a blast. To blast, to destroy, to cut off prematurely, as fruit or vegetables struck by a cold or pestilential blast of air.
Blatant. See Blare.
Blaze. 1. A strong flame. AS. blase, blæse, blysa, a torch, a lamp ; blasere, an incendiary ; ON. blossi, a flame ; blys, Dan. blus, a torch ; Du. blose, redness ; Sw. brasa, fire, and, as a verb, to blaze ; Sp. brasa, Fr. braise, live coal ; embraser, to set on fire. A blaze is so intimately connected with a blast of wind, as to render it extremely probable that the word blaze, a flame, is radically identical with AS. blæsan, G. blæsen, to blow. If the fire were named from the roaring sound which it produces, it is obvious that the designation would be equally appropriate for the blast of wind by which the conflagration is accompanied and kept up, and which, indeed, is the immediate cause of the roaring sound.
2. Sw. blasa, Dan. blis, G. blässe, Du. blesse, a blaze or white mark on the face of an animal, a white mark on a tree made by stripping off a portion of the bark. As Kilian, besides blesse, has also blencke, macula emicans, a shining spot, probably the signification of a white spot on a dark ground may arise from the notion of shining like a blaze or flame, Sc. bleis, bless, bles.—Jam. G. blass, pale, light-coloured.
To Blaze.—Blazen. 1. To blow abroad, to spread news, to publish. AS. blæsan, Du. blæsen, to blow.
And sain, that through thy medling is iblowe Your bothe love, ther it was erst not knowe. Troilus and Cressida.
But now, friend Cornelius, sith I have blasened his vaunt hearken his vertue and worthiness.—Golden Book in R.
Sw. öron-blåsare, a whisperer, back-biter. Perhaps the expression of blazing, or blazening, abroad, was partly derived from the image of blowing a trumpet, as when we speak of trumpeting one's virtues. Du. 'op een trompet blaazen,' to sound a trumpet.
2. To portray armorial bearings in their proper colours ; whence Blazonry, heraldry. Fr. blason, a coat of arms, also the scutcheon or shield wherein arms are painted or figured ; also blazon or the blazing of arms.—Cot. The origin of this expression has given rise to much discussion, and two theories are proposed, each of much plausibility. First from the E. blaze, blazen, to proclaim, to trumpet forth, whence the Fr. blason, used, among other senses, in that of praise, commendation ; blason funebre, a funeral oration ; blasonner, to extol, to publish the praises, proclaim the virtues of.—Cot. Du. blasoen, thraso, gloriosus, magniloquus, also præconium, laudes (Kil.), i. e. the matter trumpeted forth or proclaimed by a herald, which would ordinarily consist in the first place of the titles and honours of the party on whose behalf the herald appeared. Then, as the purport of armorial bearings was to typify and represent the honours and titles of the bearer, and to make him known when otherwise concealed by his armour, the term was transferred to the armorial bearings themselves, or to the shield on which they were painted.
The other derivation, which Diez treats as hardly doubtful, is from AS. blæse, a torch, a flame, splendour. The term would then be applied to the armorial bearings painted in bright colours on the shield or surcoat, in the same way as we speak of an illuminated MS.—a MS. ornamented with coloured paintings ; Fr. planches illuminées, coloured prints.
Prov. blezô, a shield, properly a shield with armorial device : 'blezôs cubertz de teins e blancs e blaus,' shields covered with tints of white and blue. Or the word might spring from the same origin by a somewhat different train of thought. The AS. blæse, blase, is used in the sense of manifestatio, declaratio.—Lye. ON. blaser vid, visui patet, it is manifest.—Gudmund.
Hence the derivative blason, like the synonymous cognisance in English, might be used to signify the armorial bearings of an individual, as the device by which he was known or made manifest when completely cased in armour.

To Bleach. ON. bleikr, light-coloured, whitish, pale; bleikja, Du. blaken, N. blakna, to whiten by exposure to sun and air; AS. blæc, pale; blæcan, to bleach. See Black.
Bleak. In a secondary sense bleak is used for cold, exposed, from the effect of cold in making the complexion pale and livid. See Black.
Blear. 1. Blear-eyed; having sore inflamed eyes, like one that has long been weeping. Pl.D. blarren, to blare or roar, to cry or weep. 'He blarrede sinen langen tranen,' he cried till the tears ran down. Hence blarr-oge or bleer-oge, a crying eye, a red watery eye.
2. The term blear, in the expression 'to blear one's eye,' to deceive one, is totally different from the foregoing, and seems identical with blur, a blot or smear concealing something that had originally been distinct.
He that doeth wickedly, although he professe God in his wordes, yet he doeth not for all that see God truely : for he is seen with most purely scowred eyes of faith, which are blurred with the darkness of vices.—Udal in Richardson.
In this sense it agrees with Bav. plerren, a blotch; plerr, geplerr, a mist before the eyes. 'Præstigise, plerr vor den augen;' 'Der Teufel macht ihnen ein eitles plerr vor den augen,' the devil makes a vain blur before their eyes.—Schmel. So in P. P.
He blessede them with his bulles and blered hure eye.
By a similar metaphor Pol. tuman is a cloud, as of dust or mist; tumanid, to cast a mist before the eyes, to humbug.
To Bleat. An imitative word intended to represent the sound made by sheep or goats. Gr. βληχάομαι, G. blöken, to bleat as sheep, or to low as oxen.
Bleb. A drop of water, blister. See Blab.
Bleed. See Blood.
Blemish. A stain in a man's reputation, a spot, a fault, a disgrace.—Bailey. From the OFr. blesmir, tâcher, souiller, salir, to spot, to soil.—Roquef. The modern sense of the word bleme or blesme is pale, wan, bleak, dead-coloured—Cotgr.; blesmissure, blemissement, paleness, wanness, bleakness. As AS. blac includes the notion of pale and dark, and wan itself signifies not only pale but livid or dark of hue, it is probable that bleme was applied to the dark colour of lifeless flesh, and thence to a bruise, a spot, or blemish. The Promptorium has BLENCH blemysshen or blenschyn—obfusco. I blemysshe, I chaunge colour.
Saw you nat how he blemyshed at it whan you asked him whose dagger that was.—Palsgr.
According to Diez the proper meaning of blemir is to bruise or make livid with blows, from ON. blámi, the livid colour of a bruise, livor, sugillatio, color plumbeus; bláma, to become livid. Sw. blema, a boil, wheal, pimple; Pol. plama, a stain, spot, blot, a blot on one's name or reputation; plamić, splamić, to spot; splamić sie, to stain one's honour or reputation, to disgrace one's name. So in Sw. fläck, a spot, blot, stain; fläck på ens goda namn, a spot, a blemish in one's reputation.

Blench.—Blencher.—Blancher. To blench is sometimes used in the sense of blanking one, to make him feel blank, to discomfit, confound him. 'Bejaune, a novice, one that's easily blankt and hath nought to say when he should speak.'—Cot.
For now if ye so shuld have answered him as I have shewed you, though ye shuld have somewhat blenched him therwith.—Sir J. More in Richardson.
At other times it is synonymous with blink, to wink the eye, shrink from a dazzling light, boggle at something, start back.
Loketh that ye ne beon nout iliche the horse that is scheoh (shy) and blencheth uor one scheaduwe.—Ancren Riwle, 242.
And thus thinkande I stonde still Without blenchynge of mine eie. Right as me thought that I seie Of Paradeis the moste joie.—Gower in R.
And now are these but mansbond (i. e. slaves) raskaile of refous—For these ne shalle ye blenk.—R. B. 115.
To blink the question is to shrink from it, to wink at it, avoid looking it in the face. Fr. guenchir, the formal equivalent of English wink, is used in a sense exactly synonymous with blench, to start away from.
And gif thou blenche from ony of tho, (faith or creaunce) Be war, from the than schal I go.
In the French version—Et bien saches tu guenchir à creanche Je gueitchirai a toi en tel maniere.—Manuel de Pecchés, p. 419.
From the sense of rapid vibration connected with the notion of blinking, blench came to be used for a trick, a movement executed for the purpose of engaging attention, while the agent accomplishes a purpose he is desirous of concealing.
Gif hundes cometh to him-ward (the fox) He genyth wel swithe awaiward And hokyth pathes swithe narewe And haveth mid hire his blenches yarewe. Owl and Nightingale, 375.

To Blend. A numerous class of words may be cited, with or without the nasal, representing the sound made by the agitation of liquids. Swab, blotzen, to churn, to dash cream up and down with a plunger; Du. plotzen, plonsen, to fall into water with a sudden noise, to plunge. To blunge clay, in potters' language, is to mix it up with water to a fluid consistency. Du. blanssen, to dabble in water. —B. Glotton. Sc. to bluiter, to make a rumbling noise, to bluiter up with water, to dilute too much; bluiter, liquid filth; to bluther, bludder, to make a noise with the mouth in taking any liquid.—Jam. To blunder water, to stir or puddle, to make it thick and muddy.—Halliwell. Of this latter the E. blend, AS. blendian, ON. blanda, to mix, seems the simple form, but by no means therefore a previous one in the order of formation, as will be remarked in the observations on the origin of the word Blink. Sw. blanda vatn i vin, to dash wine with water. Afterwards applied to the notion of mixing in general, whether the subject matter is wet or dry, although in the latter case the consciousness of the imitative source of the word is wholly lost.

To Bless.—Bliss. AS. blithe, joyful, merry, blithe; blis, joy, gladness, bliss; blithsian, blissian, to rejoice, be glad; bletsian, to bless, to consecrate; blet-sung, a blessing. OHG. blide, glad, joyful; blidu, joy; Paradises blidnissu, the joys of Paradise; bliden, to rejoice. A similar development has taken place in the Slavonic languages. Russ. blago, well; blagaya, goods, riches; blajennii (Fr. j), blessed, happy; Serv. blag, good, sweet; blago, money, riches; Pol. blogi, blissful, sweet, graceful, lovely; Bohem. blaze, happily, fortunately, well; blahy (obsolete), happy; blaziti, blahoslaviti (=bene dicere), to make happy, to pronounce happy, to bless; blazeny, blahoslaveny, blessed, happy; Blazena Beatrix. From the action of the hand making the sign of the cross while blessing oneself or others, the verb to bless is sometimes found in the singular sense of to brandish.

Their burning blades about their heads do bless. F. Q.
Tarry, thou knave, I hold thee a grote I shall make these hands bless thee.—Gammer Gurt. Needle. III. 3.
For the same reason a man is said to bless the world with his heels when he is hanged.—Nares.

Blight. A hurt done to corn or trees that makes them look as if they were blasted.—Bailey. Pl. D. verblekken, to burn up. 'De Sonne het dat Koorn verblekket,' or 'Dat Koorn is verblekket,' from blekken, to shine, to lighten. Perhaps the notion originally was that it was blasted with lightning. OHG. bleg, blich-fiur, lightning.—Brem. Wtb. Or it may be from the discoloured faded appearance of the blighted corn. AS. blac, pale, livid.

Blind. Deprived of sight. Goth. blinds, ON. blindr, G. blind. Thence applied to anything which does not fulfil its apparent purpose, as a blind entry, an entry which leads to nothing; AS. blind-netel, a dead nettle, or nettle which does not sting; G. blinde fenster, — thuren, — taschen, false windows, doors, pockets. A blind is something employed to blind one or prevent one from seeing, as a window-blind, to prevent one looking through the window. The origin of the word must be treated in the next article.

Blink. A wink, a look, a gleam, glance, moment. AS. blican, to glitter, dazzle; G. blicken, to shine, to glance, to look; Du. blicken, to glitter; blick, a flash, a glance, a wink; blick-ooghen, to wink; blicksem, lightning. With the nasal, Du. blincken, to shine, to glitter; G. blinken, to twinkle, shine, glitter, and also to wink, as the result of a sudden glitter. The sound of k before an s, as in Du. blicksem, readily passes into a t, giving G. blitz, a flash, glitter, glimpse, lightning; blitzen, to flash, glitter, lighten. The insertion of the nasal, as in the case of blick and blink, gives blinzen, blinzeln, to twinkle, wink, blink.—Kuttner. Swiss blinze, to shut the eyes; G. blinzler, a blinkard; blinzaugig, blink-eyed, weak-eyed. Sc. blent, a glance; Swiss blenden, a flash of light; Dan. blende, to dazzle; Sw. blund, a wink, a wink of sleep; blunda, to shut the eyes. The term then passes on to designate the complete privation of sight. Du. blindselen, cæcutire, cæcultare, to be blind, to act like a blind person.—Kil. G. blinzel-maus, or blinde-kuh, blindman's-buff. The origin of blind would thus be the figure of blinking under a strong light, and blink itself is sometimes used to express absence of vision. To blink the question is to shut one's eyes to it, to make oneself wilfully blind to it. A horse's blinkers are the leather plates put before his eyes to prevent his seeing. Nor ought it to startle us to find the simple form of the word derived from a frequentative, as blinzeln, blindsehn. For this, I believe, is a much more frequent phenomenon than is commonly thought, and an instance has lately been given in the case of blend. Words aiming at the direct representation of natural sounds are apt to appear in the first instance in the frequentative form.

To Blissom. Of sheep, to desire the male. N. blesme, ON. blæsma, to blissom, from blær, a ram.—Egillson.

Blister. Du. bluyster; Lat. pustula, pusula, a bubble, blister, pimple. Both the English and the Latin word are from the notion of blowing, expressed by cognate roots, which differ only in the insertion or omission of an l after the initial b.

The E. blister must be referred to AS. blæsan, to blow, whence blast, bluster, to blow in gusts, to puff and be noisy, Bav. blaustern, to breathe hard, while Lat. pustula, pusula, must be classed with forms like Gr. φυσάω, to blow, G. bausen, busten, pausten, Sw. pusta, to blow, puff, swell.

The l, it must be observed, in imitative roots is an exceedingly movable element, and easily changes its place, or is inserted or omitted. Thus we have blab and babble, bubble and blubber, Langued. blouca and Fr. boucler, to bubble, buckle, blouquette and bouclette, a little buckle, W. blisg, plisg, shells, husks, and pisg, pods, blisters.

Blithe. Goth. bleiths, mild, merciful; ON. blidr, mild, gentle; OHG. blide, Du. blijde, as in E. blithe, joyful. See Bless.

To Bloat.—Bloated.—Bloater. To blote, to swell, also to set a smoking or drying by the fire.—Bailey. ON. blautr, soft, soaked. Sw. blot, Dan. blöd, soft. Sw. blöta, lägga i blot, to soak, to steep.
Hence E. bloated, having an unsound swollen look, as if soaked in water. In like manner the Fin. kostua, signifying in the first instance to soak, is also used in the sense of swelling; kostia, subhumidus, inde humiditate tumidus. Sw. blötfisk, fish which is set to soak in water preparatory to cooking, cured fish.—Ihre. When fish under this name was imported into England, it was naturally supposed that the signification of the first element of the word had reference to the process by which it was cured, and hence to blote has been supposed to mean to smoke, to cure by smoke.

I have more smoke in my mouth than would blote a hundred herrings.—B. and F. in Nares.

You stink like so many bloat-herrings newly taken out of the chimney.—B. Jonson, Ibid.

Blob.—Bleb. Blob, a bubble, a blister; a small lump of anything thick, viscid, or dirty; bleb, a drop of water, a bubble, a blister, a blain.—Hal. Blob, blab, a small globe or bubble of any liquid, a blister, a blot or spot, as a blab of ink.—Jam.

Though both his eyes should—drop out like blobbes or droppes of water.—Z. Boyd in Jam.

From blabber, blobber, blubber, representing the dashing of water, the radical syllable is taken to signify a separate element of the complex image, a bubble formed or a drop dashed off in the collective agitation. So from sputter is formed spot, a detached portion of the agitated liquid, or the mark which it makes. And so from squatter, to dash liquid, is formed squad, sloppy dirt, a separate portion. See Blot. Gael. plub, noise of liquor in a half-filled cask, sound as of a stone falling suddenly in water, any soft unwieldy lump; plub-cheann, a lumpish head; plubach, giving a sound of the foregoing nature, speaking rapidly and inarticulately.

Block. The stem or trunk of a tree.—Bailey. A solid mass of wood, stone, or the like. Hence, to block up the way, to close it with a solid mass. Gael. bloc, round, orbicular. Fr. bloc, blot, a block or log; en bloc, in bulk, in the lump or mass, taken altogether. It may be formed like clot, clod, blot, Sc. blad, from the sound of a small mass of something soft thrown against the ground. See Blot. The primary meaning would thus be a small mass of anything, an unformed mass, as distinguished from things fabricated out of it, the unhewn bole of a tree, any lump or mass of things.

Blond. Fr. blond, light yellow, straw-coloured, flaxen; also (in hawks or stags) bright tawny or deer-coloured.—Cotgr. Diez suggests that the word may be a nasalised form of ON. blaud, Dan. blöd, soft, weak, in the sense of a soft tint, a supposition which is apparently supported by the use of the word blöde in Austria for a weak, pale tint.—Schmid. It is probably connected with Pol. blady, pale, wan. It. biado (of which the evidence exists in biadetto, bluish, sbiadare, to grow pale), blue, pale; biavo, blue, straw-coloured (Diez, Florio). OFr. blois, bloi, blue; bloi, blond, yellow, blue, white (Roquefort). Prov. bloi, blou, fair in colour, as the skin or hair. It should be remarked that the Du. blond is used in the sense of the livid colour of a bruise as well as in that of flaxen, yellowish; blond en blaauw slaan, to beat one black and blue; blondheid, couleur livide.—Halma.

Blood.—Bleed. Du. bloed, G. blut. Doubtless named for the same reason as Du. bloedsd, E. dial. blooth, G. Blüthe, a flower, from the bright colour which these objects exhibit, from G. blühen, to glow. Both Blut and Blüthe are written bluat by Otfried, and blühen is used in the Swabian dialect in the sense of bleed.—Schmid. Erbloten, to be red with rage.—Schilter. See Blow, 2.

Bloom. The bright-coloured part of plants which prepares the seed, a delicately-coloured down on fruits, the bright colour of the cheeks.
The sun was brycht and schynand clere, And armouris that bumyst were Swa blomyt with the sunnys beme That all the land was in a leme.—Barbour.
Du. bloemen, to bloom or flower, properly to shine with bright colours; bloeme, bloemsel, ON. blómi, blomstr, a flower. A parallel form with ON. liómi, E. leme, gleam.

Blossom. AS. blosa, blosma, blostma, Du. bloesem, Lat. flos, a flower. Du. blosen, to be red, to blush; blose, redness, the bright colour of the cheeks; AS. blase, blysa, ON. blýs, Dan. blus, a torch; blusse, to glow, to blaze, to flame; Pl.D. blüse, bleuster, a blaze, bleustern, bleistern, to glisten; Russ. blistat', to shine; Sw. blust, a flower.
Parallel forms with an initial gl and l are ON. glossi, a glóssi, glýssa, to sparkle; glýs, shine; glasi, splendour; E. gloss, glister; Sc. glose, to blaze; Ir. glus, ON. liós, light, E. lustre, brilliancy. See Blow.

Blot, Blotch. The G. platsch! patsch! platz! klatsch! represent the sound of dashing liquid, of a blow with something soft or flat. From similar representations of sound are formed G. pladdern, to gush, to fall (of liquids) in abundance, to dabble in water; platschern, to patter, to fall with a plashing noise; Swiss pladern, plattern, to dabble in water, to splash, to dirty, (of cattle) to dung, whence plader, platter, kuh-plader, cow-dung. Dan. dial. blatte, to dash down, fall down; blat, blatte, a small portion of anything wet; en blat vand, skarn, a drop of water or of filth; blak-blatte, a drop of ink; ko-blatt, Sw. kobladde, a cow-dung. Sc. blad, a heavy fall of rain (to be compared with G. platz-regen, a pelting shower). 'It's bladding on o' weet,' the rain is driving on. Blad, a dirty spot on the cheek, a lump of anything soft; to blad, to slap, to strike with something soft or flat. Carinthian ploutschen, to dash down water; ploutsche, great leaf of cabbage. Fin. plattata, to slap, to strike with such a sound as the Germans represent by the syllable klatsch! Platti, a sound of such a nature, a blot or spot. Dan. plet, a blot, spot; pletter i solen, spots in the sun. E. plot of land is a spot or small portion of land. Sw. plottra, to squander, properly to scatter liquid; to scribble, to blot paper; plotterwis, in scattered morsels, bit by bit. Wendish blodo, bloto, mud.—Stalder in v. pladern. Fr. blotter, to blot; blotte, bloutre, a lump, a clod.—Cot. Then as a drop of liquid or lump of something soft spreads itself out on falling to the ground, se blottir, to squat or lie close.

The form blotch answers to Swiss platschertz, which represents the sound of something broad falling into the water or on the ground, of water dashing in a vessel or splashing over. Ein platsch milch, a gush of milk; platsch-voll, platt-voll, platz-voll, splashing full, fall to overflowing.—Stalder. Plotz, a blow, or the sound of it; bläts, a spot or blot.—Schwenck. E. Blatch, to spot or blot.
If no man can like to be smutted and blatched in his face, let us learn more to detest the spots and blots of the soul.—Harmar in R.
Blotch-paper, blotting-paper.—Hal.

Blot at Backgammon. See Backgammon.

Blow. Apparently from the livid mark produced by a blow on the body. Du. blaeuw, blue, livid; blaeuwe ooghe, Fris. en blau ach, a black eye; Du. blaeuwen, blowen, to strike; blauwel, a beater.—Kil. Pl. D. bläuen, blauschlagen; blawels, livid marks. Fris. blodelsa and blawelsa.

wound and bruise. ' Si quis alium ad sanguinis effusionem vel livorem vulgo blawe dictum læserit.' ' Ad livorem et sanguinem, quod blóot et blawe dicimus.' — Hamburgh Archives, A.D. 1292, in Brem. Wtb. ' Nis hir nauder blaw ni blodelsa,' there is here neither bruise nor wound.—Wiarda. OFr. blau, coup, tache, meurtrissure—Roquefort, a blow, a bruise. On the other hand, OHG. bliuwan, MHG. bliuwen, G. bläuen, to beat with a mallet, can hardly be separated from Goth. bliggwan, to beat.
To Blow, 1. AS. blawan, to blow, to breathe ; G. blähen, to puff up, to inflate, a parallel form with blasen, to blow. In like manner Lat. flare, to blow, corresponds with Sw. flasa, to puff, to breathe hard.
To Blow, 2. To come into flower, to show flower. The primary sense is to shine, to exhibit bright colours, to glow. Du. bloeden, bloeyen, bloemen, florere.—Kil. G. blühen, to shine with bright colours, to blossom, to flourish. From the same root which gives the designation of the blood, the red fluid of the body ; and closely allied with Du. blosen, to be red, and the forms mentioned under Blossom. Swab. bluh, blut, blust, a flower ; OHG. bluod, blót; G. blüthe, bloom, flower ; W. blodyn, a flower. Parallel forms with an initial gl are ON. glód, E. glede, glowing coal ; Du. gloeden, gloeyen, G. glühen, to glow.
Blowzy. Tumbled, disordered in head-dress. Blowze, a fat, red-faced bloted wench, or one whose head is dressed like a slattern.—B. Pl.D. piusen, to disorder, especially with respect to the hair. Sik piusen is said of fowls when they plume themselves with their beak. Sik upplustern, when the feathers of a bird are staring from anger or bad health ; blustig, plusig, toused, disordered; plustrig, (of birds) having the feathers staring or disordered; (of men) having a swollen bloated face or disordered hair.—Danneil.
To Blubber. — Bludder. — Bluther. These are closely allied forms, marking some difference in application from that of blabber, blebber, bladder, by the modified vowel. The radical image is the sound made by the dashing of water, whence the expression is extended to noises made by the mouth in crying, in rapid or indistinct utterance. The radical sense is shown in Gael. plubraich, plubartaich, a paddling in water, a continued noise of agitated water, a gurgling or guggling, plubair, one who speaks indistinctly and rapidly; Pl.D. blubbern, to make bubbles in drinking, to sputter or speak in an explosive manner; blubbern, flubbern, to blurt out.—Deutsch. Mundart. v. 51.
To blubber, in E., is confined to the broken sound made by the internal flow of tears in crying. Blubbered cheeks are cheeks bedabbled with tears. It is however provincially used in the original sense. ' The water blubbers up' (Mrs Baker), where the word may be compared with Bohem. blubonciti, to bubble up, to boil. And, as bubbles are formed by the agitation of water, blubber comes to signify bubble, foam. ' Blober upon water, bouteillis.'—Palsgr.
And at his mouth a blubber stode of fome.
Chaucer.
In modern speech the noun is chiefly used for the coating of fat by which the whale is enveloped, consisting of a network or frothy structure of vessels filled with oil. It does not impair the representative power of the word when the final b in the radical syllable of blubber is exchanged for a d in Sc. bludder, bluther, to make a noise with the mouth in taking liquid; to disfigure the face with weeping.—Jam.
Her sweet bloderit face.—Chaucer.
Bav. blodern, plodern, Pl.D. pludern, to gabble, jabber, chatter. Plodern, to sound like water, to gush. — Deutsch. Mund. ii. 92. Pludern, to guggle, sound like water gushing out of a narrow opening ; to flap like loose clothes.—Schmeller.
Blue. OHG. blao, blaw; It. biavo, Prov. blau, fem. blava. Notwithstanding the little apparent resemblance, I have little doubt in identifying the foregoing with W. glas, blue, green, grey, pale ; Gael. glas, pale, wan. The interchange of an initial gl, bl, or gr, br, is very frequent. We may cite for example G. glühen, blühen, E. glow, blow; Gr. γλήχων, βλήχων, a herb ; Gr. βάλανος, Lat. glans; Ir. glaodh and blaodh, a shout ; glagaireachd and blagaireachd, a blast, boasting; Bret. bruk, W. grug, heath. We thus identify the Celtic glas with G. blass, pale ; OFr. bloes, blois, bloi, blue ; blazir, to make blue, and thence, to fade, to spot, to bruise—Roquef. ; Langued. blazi, faded, withered, bruised ; Prov. blezir, to fade, grow pale, dirty.—Raynouard. The usual interchange of a final z and d connects these with Pol. blady, pale, wan, blednieć, to fade; It.

biado, blue, pale, the evidence of which is seen in biadetto, bluish, and sbiadare, to become pale or wan.—Flor. Hence we pass to Prov. blahir, to become pale or livid, in the same way as from It. tradire to Fr. trahir. The change from a medial d to v is still more familiar. We find accordingly It. sbiavare, as well as sbiadare, to become pale, and biavo (Diez), as well as biado, blue. The Romance blave is moreover, like the Celtic glas, applied to green as well as blue. Blavoyer, verdoyer, devenir vert; blavoie, verdure, herbe.—Roquefort.
Hence we may explain the origin of the It. biada, biava, corn, originally growing corn, from the brilliant green of the young corn in the spring, contrasted with the brown tint of the uncultivated country. ' Biada, tutte le semente ancora in erba.' —Altieri. Bladum, blandum, in plur. segetes virentes.—Dief. Supp. The gradual change of colour in the growing plant from a bright green to the yellow tint of the reaped corn (still designated by the term biada) may perhaps explain the singular vacillation in the meaning of the It. biavo, which is rendered by Florio, pale straw-coloured. It is remarkable however that the E. blake (identical with AS. blac, G. bleich, pale) is provincially used in the sense of yellow.
The Du. blond is also applied to the livid colour of a bruise, as well as the yellowish colour of the hair. OFr. bloi, blond, jaune, bleu et blanc.—Roquefort. Thus it becomes difficult to separate Mid. Lat. blavus, blue, from the Lat. flavus, yellow, Bohem. plavy, yellowish red, Pol. plowy, pale yellow, discoloured (plowiec, to grow yellow, to lose colour, to fade), G. falb, and E. fallow, fawn-coloured, reddish yellow.
Bluff. Du. blaf, planus, æquus et amplus, superficie planâ, non rotundâ; blaf aensight facies plana et ampla, a bluff countenance; blaf van voorhooft, fronto, having a bluff forehead, a forehead not sloping but rising straight up.—Kil. So a bluff shore is opposed to a sloping shore. Blaffart, a plain coin without image or superscription.—Kil. A bluff manner, a plain unornamented manner.
The word is probably derived in the first instance from the sound of something falling flat upon the ground. Du. ploffen, to fall suddenly on the ground, to plump into the water.—Halma. It then signifies something done at once, and not introduced by degrees or cere-monious preparations; a shore abruptly rising, or an abrupt manner.
In like manner from an imitation of the same sound by the syllable plomp, Du. plomp, abrupt, rustic, blunt. See Blunt.
Blunder. The original meaning of blunder seems to be to dabble in water, from an imitation of the sound. It is a nasal form of such words as blother, blutter, bluiter, all representing the agitation of liquids, and then generally idle talk. Dan. pludder, earth and water mixed together, puddle, idle talk; pluddre, to dabble in the mud, to puddle, mix up turf and water. Then with the nasal, E. dial. to blunder water, to stir or puddle, to make water thick and muddy; and metaphorically, blunder, confusion, trouble.—Hal. I blunder, je perturbe.—Palsgr.
To shuffle and digress so as by any means whatever to blunder an adversary.—Ditton in R. ON. glundr, sloppy drink; glundra, to disturb, to confound.
Analogous forms are Du. blanssen, in 't water dobbelen, to dabble—Biglotton; E. to blunge clay, to mix it up with water. —Hal.
To blunder is then, for the same reason as the synonymous dabble, used for the work of an unskilful performer. Blunderer or blunt worker, hebefactor. —Pr. Pm.
What blunderer is yonder that playeth diddil, He findeth false measures out of his fond fiddil. Skelton in R.
Hence a blunder, an ill-done job, a mistake.
Like drunken sots about the street we roam: Well knows the sot he has a certain home, Yet knows not how to find the uncertain place, And blunders on and staggers every pace. Dryden in R.
The word is here synonymous with flounder, the original meaning of which is, like Du. flodderen (Weiland), to work in mud or water. To blunder out a speech, to bring it out hastily with a spluttering noise. G. herauspoltern or herausplatzen, to blurt or blunder out something.—Küttner.
See Blurt, Blunt, Bodge.
Blunderbuss. Pl.D. buller-bak, buller-jaan, Sw. buller-bas, a blustering fellow; G. polter-hans, one who performs his business with much noise, bawling, and bustle; polterer, a blunderbuss, blunderhead, a boisterous violent man.—Küttner. From G. bullern, poltern, to make a noise. The Du. has donder-bus, a blunderbuss, from the loud report; bus, a fire-arm.—Halma.
Blunket. A light blue colour. Pol. blekit, azure, blue. Probably radically identical with E. bleak, pale, wan, as the senses of paleness and blue colour very generally run into each other.
Blunt. Before attempting to explain the formation of the word, it will be well to point out a sense, so different from that in which it is ordinarily used, that it is not easy to discover the connection.
Bare and blunt, naked, void.
It chaunst a sort of merchants which were wont To skim those coasts for bondmen there to buy— Arrived in this isle though bare and blunt To inquire for slaves.—F. Q.
The large plains— Stude blunt of beistis and of treis bare.—D. V.
A modification of the same root, without the nasal, appears with the same mean- ing in Swiss blutt, naked, bare, unfledged; Sw. blott, G. bloss. It. biotto, biosso, naked, poor; Sc. blout, blait.
Woddis, forestis, with naked bewis blout Stude strippit of thare wede in every hout.—D. V.
The blait body, the naked body.— Jamieson. The two senses are also united in Gael, maol, bald, without horns, blunt, edgeless, pointless, bare, without foliage, foolish, silly. Maolaich, to make bare or blunt.
Now the Swiss bluntsch, blunsch, is used to represent the sound which is imitated in English and other languages by the syllable plump, viz. the sound of a round heavy body falling into the water; bluntschen, to make a noise of such a nature, to plump into the water.—Stalder.
A similar sound is represented by the syllables plotz, plutz—Küttner; whence Du. plotsen, plonsen, plompen, to fall into the water; G. platz-regen, a pelting shower of rain. We have then the ex- pressions, mit etwas heraus-platzen, or heraus plumpen, to blunt a thing out, to blurt, blunder, or blab out a thing— Küttner; to bring it suddenly out, like a thing thrown down with a noise, such as that represented by the syllables bluntsch, plotz, plump; to plump out with it. Swab. platzen, to throw a thing violently down.
Peradventure it were good rather to keep in good silence thyself than blunt forth rudely.—Sir T. More in Richardson.
The term blunt is then applied to things done suddenly, without preparation.
Fathers are Won by degrees, not bluntly as our masters Or wronged friends are.—Ford in R.
A blunt manner is an unpolished, un- ceremonious manner, exactly correspond- ing to the G. plump. Plump mit etwas umgehen, to handle a thing bluntly, awkwardly, rudely.—Küttner.
It is from this notion of suddenness, absence of preparation, that the sense of bare, naked, seems to be derived. To speak bluntly is to tell the naked truth, Sw. blotta sanningen. The syllables blot, blunt, plump, and the like, represent the sound not only of a thing falling into the water, but of something soft thrown on the ground, as Sw. plump, a blot, Dan. pludse, to plump down, Dan. dial. blatte, to fall down, fling down; blat, a portion of something wet, as cow-dung.—Mol- bech. Then as a wet lump lies where it is thrown, it is taken as the type of every- thing inactive, dull, heavy, insensible, and these qualities are expressed by both modifications of the root, with or with- out the nasal, as in E. blunt, Sc. blait, dull, sheepish.
Then cometh indevotion, through which a man is so blont, and hath swiche languor in his soul, that he may neither rede ne sing in holy chirche. Chaucer, in Richardson.
We Phenicianis nane sa blait breistis has.—D. V. Non obtusa adeo gestamus pectora Pœni.
Sc. Blaitie-bum, a simpleton, stupid fellow, and in the same sense, a bluntie. Du. blutten, homo stolidus, obtusus, ina- nis.—Kil.
'A blade reason' is used by Piers Plowman for a pointless, ineffectual rea- son. Thus we are brought to what is now the most ordinary meaning of the word blunt, viz. the absence of sharpness, the natural connection of which with the qualities above mentioned is shown by the use of the Latin obtusus in the fore- going passages. An active intelligent lad is said to be sharp, and it is the con- verse of this metaphor when we speak of a knife which will not cut as a blunt knife. The word dull, it will be observed, is used in both senses, of a knife which will not cut, and an unintelligent, inactive person. Swiss bluntschi, a thick and plump person.—Stalder.
It will be seen that the G. plump, re- specting the origin of which we cannot doubt, is used in most of the senses for which we have above been attempting to account. Plump, rough, unwrought, heavy, clumsy, massive, thick, and, figuratively, clownish, raw, unpolished, rude, heavy, dull, blockish, awkward.—Küttner. Plomp, hebes, obtusus, stu- pidus, plumbeus, ang. blunt.—Kil.

In like manner from the sound of a lump thrown on the ground, imitated by the syllable bot, is formed Du. bot, botte, a blow; bot-voet, a club-foot; bot, plump, sudden, blunt, dull, stupid, rude, flat. Bot zeggen, to say bluntly.—Halma.
To Blur. To blur, to render indistinct, to smear; blur, a smear, a blot. Bav. plerr, geplerr, a mist before the eyes; plerren, a blotch, discoloured spot on the skin.
The word is probably a parallel form with Sp. borrar, to blur, blot, and E. bur, a mistiness, representing in the first instance an indistinct sound, then applied to indistinct vision; but it may arise from the notion of dabbling in the wet. Sc. bludder, bluther, blubber, to make a noise with the mouth, to disfigure with crying. E. dial. bluter, to blubber, to blot, to dirty; to blore, to roar.—Hal. Swiss blodern, to sound like water boiling, to rumble; Bav. pfludern, to make a noise in boiling; pludern, to guggle; blodern, plodem, to chatter, gabble. Dan. pluddre, to dabble, to jabber, gabble; Sw. dial. blurra, burra, to talk quick and indistinctly; bladdra, blarra, to blurt out, to chatter. The elision of the d is very common, as in Du. blader, blaere, a bladder; ader, aere, an ear of corn, &c. For the parallelism of blur and burr comp. E. blotch and botch, splurt and spirt, Du. blaffen and baffen, to bark, G. blasen and bausen, to blow. See Burr, Slur.
To Blurt. To bring out suddenly with an explosive sound of the mouth. Sc. a blirt of greeting, a burst of tears.—Jam. Related to blutter, bludder, as splurt to splutter. To splirt, to spurt out.—Hal. It. boccheggiare, to make mouths, or blurt with one's mouth; chicchere, a flurt with one's fingers, or blurt with one's mouth.—Fl.
Blush. Du. blose, blosken, the red colour of the cheeks; Dan. blus, a torch; blusse, to blaze, to glow; blusse i ansigtet, to blush. Pl.D. blüse, bleuster, a blaze, beacon fire. De bakke bleustern, the cheeks glow.—Brem. Wtb. See Blossom.
Bluster. To blow in puffs, blow violently, swagger. An augmentative from blast. Bav. blasten, blaustern, to snuff, to be out of temper.—Schmeller.
Boa. A large snake. It. boa, bova, any filthy mud, mire, puddle, or bog; also a certain venomous serpent that lives in the mud, and swimmeth very well, and grows to a great bigness.—Fl. Boa, stellio, lacerta, cocodrillus; lindwurm.— Dief. Supp.
Boar. AS. bar, Du. beer. As the AS. has also eafor, and Du. ever-swin, it is probable that boar has no radical identity with G. eber, Lat. aper.
Board. Du. berd, G. brett, a board or plank. AS. bord, an edge, table, margin. Du. boord, a margin, edge, border. Fr. bord, edge, margin. ON. bord, a border, outward edge, board, table, whence bord-viðr, literally edge-wood, i. e. planks or boards.
Með endilongum bænum var umbuiz á húsum uppi, reistrupp á utanverðum þaukom sva sem viggyrðlat væri.—Sverris Saga, c. 156.—along the town preparations were made upon the houses, planks raised up outside the roofs, like the parapets (viggyrðil, war-girdle) raised on board a ship in a naval engagement.
* Boast. Explained by Jam. to threaten, to endeavour to terrify.
Scho wald nocht tell for bost nor yeit reward.
Wallace.
Turnus thare duke reulis the middil host, With glaive in hand maid awful fere and joist.
The radical meaning of the word seems to be a crack or loud sound, and when applied to vaunting language, it implies that it is empty sound. To brag and to crack, both used in the sense of boasting, primarily signify loud noise. 'Heard you the crack that that gave?' Sc. proverb spoken when we hear an empty boast.—Kelly. Boast is used for the crack made by bursting open.
And whether be lighter to breke, And lasse boost makith, A begger's bagge Than an yron bounde cofre?
P. P. l. 9396, Wright's ed.
From this root are formed Sc. bustuous, OE. boistous, violent, strong, large, coarse, rude, and boisterous, properly noisy, violent; G. pausten, pusten, pustern, to puff. Comp. G. puffen, to give a crack, to puff. Du. pof, the sound of a blow; poffen, to puff, to bounce, to brag; grande loqui, voce intonare.—Kil. See Boisterous.
Boat. AS. bát, Du. boot. It. batello, Fr. bateau, ON. bátr, w. bâd, Gael. báta.
To Bob.—Bobbin. To move quickly up and down, or backwards and forwards, to dangle; whence bob, a dangling object, a small lump, a short thick body, an end or stump. Gael. babaig, a tassel, fringe, cluster; baban, a tassel, short pieces of thread. From the last must be explained Fr. bobine, E. bobbin, a ball of thread wrapped round a little piece of wood, a little knob hanging by a piece of thread. 'Pull the bobbin, my dear, and the latch will fly up.'—Red Riding-hood.

To Bob, 2. To mock.
So bourdfully takyng Goddis byddynge or wordis or werkis is scorning of hym as dyden the Jewis that bobbiden Crist.—Sermon against Miracle-plays, Reliq Antiq. 2. 45.
In this sense from the syllables ba ba re-presenting the movement of the lips, whence Fr. baboyer, to blabber with the lips; faire la babou, to bob, to make a mow at.—Cot. See Baber-lipped.

To Bode. To portend good or bad. AS. bod, gebod, a command, precept, message; boda, a messenger; bodian, to deliver a message, to make an announcement. See Bid.

To Bodge. To make bad work, to fail.
With this we charged again; but out alas! We bodged again, as I have seen a swan With bootless labour swim against the tide, And spend her strength with over-matching waves.—H. VI.
The sound of a blow with a wet or flat body is represented in G. by the syllable patsch; whence patschen, to smack, to dabble or paddle; patsche, a puddle, mire, mud. Now unskilful action is constantly represented by the idea of dabbling; einen patsch thun, to commit a blunder, to fail, to bodge. Hast scho' wide'patscht? Have you failed again? Etwas auspatschen, to blurt a thing out.—Schmel. See To Botch. Shakespear has badged with blood, daubed or dabbled with blood.

Bodice. A woman's stays; formerly bodies, from fitting close to the body, as Fr. corset from corps. 'A woman's bodies, or a pair of bodies, corset, corpset.'—Sherwood's Dict.
Thy bodies bolstred out with bumbast and with bagges.—Gascoigne in R. i. e. thy bodice stuffed out with cotton.

Bodkin. Gael, biodag, a dagger; biodeachan, an awl. Lith. badyti, to stick, thrust with something pointed, as a horn, needle, bayonet; Bohem. bod, a prick, stitch; bodak, a prickle, point, bayonet; bodnu, busti, to prick. Russ. bodetz, a spur, bodilo, a sting; bodat, to butt, strike with the horns. French bouter, to thrust, and E. butt, to push with the horns, exhibit another modification of the root.

Body. AS. bodig, Gael, bodhag. It seems the same word with the G. bottich, a cask, the two being spelt without material difference in the authorities quoted by Schmeller; bottig, potig, potacha, a cask; bottich, bodi, the body of a shift; potacha, potacha, bodies, corpses; pottich, bottich, a body. In like manner E. trunk and G. rumpf signify a hollow case as well as the body of an animal. We speak of the barrel of a horse, meaning the round part of his body. The Sp. barriga, the belly, is identical with Fr. barrique, a cask.
The signification of the root bot, of which the E. body and G. bottich are derivatives, is a lump, the thick part of anything, anything protuberant, swelling, hollow. W. bot, a round body; both, the boss of a buckler, nave of a wheel, bothog, round, rounded; Wall. bodé, rabodé, thick-set, stumpy; bodene, belly, calf of the leg.—Grandg.
The primary sense of body is then the thick round part of the living frame, as distinguished from the limbs or lesser divisions; then the whole material frame, as distinguished from the sentient principle by which it is animated. In like manner from bol, signifying anything spherical or round, arise E. bole, the stem of a tree; ON. bolr, the trunk of the animal body, or stem of a tree, body of a shirt; Lap. boll, pall, palleg, the body.

Bog. The word has probably been introduced from Ireland, where bogs form so large a feature in the country. Gael. bog (equivalent to E. gog in gog-mire, quagmire), bog, move, agitate; bogadaich, waving, shaking; then from the yielding, unsteady nature of a soft substance, bog, soft, moist; bogan, anything soft, a quagmire. Ir. bogadh, to stir, shake, toss; bogach, a bog or morass.

To Boggle. Commonly explained as if from Sc. bogle, a ghost; to start back as from a bugbear. 'We start and boggle at every unusual appearance, and cannot endure the sight of the bugbear.'—Glanville in Todd. But the radical idea in boggling is hesitation or wavering, and the word is well explained by Bailey, to be uncertain what to do, to waver, to scruple. It is applied to bodily vacillation in the Sc. expression hogglin an bogglin, unsteady, moving backwards and forwards.—Jam. Supp. 'The grun a' bogglt fin we geed on it.' Bogglie, quaking, unsteady.—Banff. Gl.
The radical image is probably a series of broken efforts or broken movements, as in stammering or staggering, represented by the abruptly sounding syllables gag, gog, or bag, bog. Thus from gog or gag we have Bret, gag, Ptg. gago, stuttering; Bret, gagei, gagoula, Ptg. gaguejar, to stammer, stutter; E. gogmire, a quagmire, goggle, to roll, to be unsteady; Gael, gogach, nodding, wavering, fickle; and in like manner from the parallel forms bag or bog are derived Piedm. bagajé, Fr. bégayer. Wall, (of Mons) béguer, OG. bochken (titubare, stameln vel bochken.— Vocab. A.D. 1430 in Deutsch. Mund. iv. 304). Magy. hakogni, to stammer, bakazikni, to stumble; Gael. bog, wag, bob, shake, E. bog, a quaking mire, and boggle, to waver or hesitate. 'He could not get on with his speech, he made poor boggling work.'—Mrs Baker. In the same way Sc. tartle, to boggle as a horse, to hesitate from doubt, scruple, or dislike, may be identified with It. tartagliare, Sp. tartajear, to stammer, stutter, tartalear, to stagger, to be at a loss in speaking.

To Boil.—Boil. Lat. bullire, Fr. bouillir, ON. bulla, to boil, properly represent the sound of water boiling, whence bulla, Du. bollen (Kil.), to tattle, chatter. Sc. buller, the gurgling sound of water rushing into a cavity. Westerwald bollern, to give a hollow sound.

Then as boiling consists in the sending up of bubbles, Lat. bulla, a bubble, boss, stud, lump of lead on which a seal was impressed ; It. bolla, a bubble, round glass phial, also a blister, pustule, pimple; ON. bola, a bubble, blister, boil ; Sw. bula, a bump, swelling, dint in a metal vessel; Du. buile, puile, G. beule, a boil or swelling ; Du. builen, puilen, to be prominent, to swell.

* Boisterous.—Boistous.—Bustuous. Properly noisy, then violent, strong, huge, coarse, rough. In winter whan the weather was out of measure boistous and the wyld wind Boreas maketh the wawes of the ocean so to arise.—Chaucer, Test. Love. Drances tells Latinus that Turnus' boistous the people from speaking, but that he will speak out. All thocht with braik and boist or wappinnis he Me doth awate, and manace for to de. He then exhorts the king—lat neuir demyt be The bustuousness (violentia) of ony man dant the.—D. V. 374. 45. Boystous, styffe or rude ; boystousnesse, roydeur, impetuosity.—Pr. Pm. notes. For bost or boist in the sense of crack, noise, see Boast. G. fausten, pusten, pusteren, to puff, blow.

Bold. Daring, courageous. Goth. baltha, OHG. bald, free, confident, bold. G. bald, quick. ON. balldr, strong, brave, handsome ; ballr, strong, courageous. Dan. bold, intrepid, excellent, beautiful; Sw. bald, proud, haughty, warlike. AS. balder, bealder, hero, prince. Fr. baud, bold, insolent; baude, merry, cheerful.—Cot.

Bole. The round stem of a tree. This is probably a modification of boll, a globular body, treated under Bowl. The throat-boll is the convexity of the throat. From the notion of a thick round mass the term is applied to the body of an animal as distinguished from the limbs, to the trunk of a tree as distinguished from the branches, to the belly as the rounded part of the body. ON. bulr, bolr, Sw. bal, Da. bul, the body of a man or of a shirt, trunk of a tree ; Lap. boll, pall, palleg, the body ; W. bol, bola, boly, the belly. See Bulk.

Boll. The round heads or seed-vessels of flax, poppy (Bailey), or the like. Du. bol, bolle, a head ; bolleken, capitulum, capitellum.—Kil. Bret. bolc'h, polc'h, belc'h; W. bul, flax-boll. See Bowl.

* Bolster, OHG. bolstar, AS. bolster, a cushion, pillow. The term applies in the first instance to the materials with which the cushion is stuffed. Du. bolster, the husk of nuts, chaff of corn ; siliqua, gluma, folliculus grani, tomentum, furfures, stramenta.—Kil. If the primary meaning of the word is stuffing, from Du. bol, swelling, hollow, we must suppose that it was first used with respect to the chaff of corn, the most obvious materials for stuffing a cushion, and then applied to other husks, as those of nuts, which are not used for a similar purpose. ON. bólstr, a cushion, a swelling in ice. Swab. bolster (aufgeblasen—Schmidt), puffed up.

Bolt.—To Bolter. I. G. bolz, bolzen, E. bolt, is a blunt-headed arrow for a cross-bow, a broad-headed peg to fasten one object to another, a fastening for a door. Du. bout is explained by Kil., obex, pessulus, repagulum; bout, boutpijl, sagitta capitata, pilum catapultarium ; bout van het schouderblad, caput scapulæ. The essential meaning of the word would thus appear to be a knob or projection, the bolt of a door being provided with a knob by which it is moved to and fro. A thunderbolt is considered as a fiery missile hurled in a clap of thunder. G. bolzgerade signifies straight to the mark, as the bolt shot by a crossbow ; but it is also used, as E. bolt upright, in the sense of perpendicular.—Stalder. Chaucer seems to use bolt upright in the Reve's tale in

The sense of right on end, one after the other. The radical sense of a knob or thick ending is exemplified in E. polt-foot or bolt-foot, as Fr. pied bot, a club-foot. Sir Walter Scott in his autobiography speaks of his ancestor Willy with the bolt-foot. A bolt head is a retort, a round glass vessel with narrow opening. The ultimate origin of the word may be best illustrated by forms like G. holter polter, Pl.D. hulter de bulter, representing a rattling or crashing noise. ' Holter polter! ein fürchterlicher Getöse!' 'Ging es holter und polter dass die Wagenräder ächzten:' it went helter-skelter so that the wheels groaned.—Sanders. Hence G. poltern, Pl.D. bullern, to do anything accompanied by a rattling noise; buller-wagen, a rattling carriage; die treppe hinunter poltern, to come rattling down-stairs; poltern, to make a knocking, hammering, or the like, to throw things about. Then from the analogy between a rattling noise and a jolting motion, Pl.D. bultrig, bulstrig, bultig, jolting, uneven, rugged, lumpy. 'De weg is hultrig un bultrig,' the way is rugged and jolting. Dan. bultred, uneven, rugged.—Schütze. From the same source must be explained Northampton bolter, properly to jog into projections, to coagulate, to form lumps, as snow balling on a horse's foot, or ill-mixed flour and water. Blood-boltered Banquo signifies clotted with blood. The l is transposed in Fr. blottre, a clod, and in Sw. plotter, a small portion.

For the connection between jolting and collecting in lumps compare Du. kloteren, properly to rattle or clatter (kloterspaen crepitaculum—Kil.), then to knock, to hammer, also to curdle, to become lumpy.—Kil. So also we pass from Lat. crotalum, a rattle, Prov. crotlar, OFr. crodler, croler, to shake, to E. cruddle, curdle, to collect in lumps.

When we analyse the notion of a rattling or jolting movement or a rugged uneven surface, we see that the one consists of a series of jolts or abrupt impulses, and the other of a series of projections or eminences. Hence, on the one hand, we have Lat. pultare, Sw. bulla, to knock, E. poll, a thump or blow, MHG. bolzen, pulzen, to start out; Bav. bolzaugen, poltzet Augen, projecting eyes; pulzen, to spring forth; E. bolt, to start with a sudden movement, as a rabbit from its hole, or a racer from the course.

Passing from the sense of movement to that of form, we have Du. pult, a clod or clump; Pl.D. bult, bulten, protuberance, small heap, mole-hill, tuft, clump; gras-bulten, a clump of turf, a sod (Schütze). 'Daar ligt idt up enen bulten:' it lies all of a heap.—Brem. Wtb. Du. bult, a bunch, hump, boss, knob, bulk or quantity; bultig, hump-backed (to be compared with E. bolt-foot, G. bolzäugig); Sp. bulto, protuberance, swelling, hulch, bulk.

2. In the next place, to bolt or bolter is to sift meal by shaking it to and fro through a cloth of loose texture. Fr. bulter, bluter, beluter, Mid.Lat. buletare, to bolt; buletellum, Fr. buletel, beluteau, bluteau, a bolter or implement for bolting. I boulte meale in a boulter, je bulte.—Palsgr. Du. buidelen, to bolter.—Bomhoff.

Here the radical image is the violent agitation of the meal in the bolter, expressed, as above explained, by the representation of a racketing sound, by which indeed the operation of bolting was commonly accompanied in a very marked manner. On this account Mid.Lat. taratantara, representing a loud broken noise as of a trumpet, was applied to a bolter or mill-clack. Bulte-pook or bulster, taratantarum.—Pr. Pm. Taratantarizare, budeln daz Mele; taratarrum, Stäblein an der Ka auff dem Mulstein das der lautet tarr! tare!: the mill-clack or staff which sounds tar, tar.—Dief. Supp.

On the same principle, the name of bolter seems to have been given to the implement and the operation, from G. poltern, to crash, hammer, racket; gepolter, gebolder, a crashing or racketing noise. The name would probably first be given to the implement which kept up such an importunate racket, and when the radical significance of the term was overlooked, the syllable bolt or poll would be regarded as the essential element signifying the nature of the operation.

From a different representation of a rattling noise may be derived a series of forms in which an r seems to take the place of the l in bolt and the related words. Thus from Sc. brattle, crash, clattering noise (brattle of thunder, a clap of thunder—Brocket), we pass to Du. bortelen, bullire, aestuare, tumultuari, agitari (Kil.); Lang. barutela, baruta, to clack, to talk loud and fast, to bolt meal; barutel, a mill-clack, a bolter; Prov. barutela, to agitate, palpitate, to bolt meal; barutel, Dauphiny baritel, OFr. buretel, Champagne burteau, a bolter. OFr. buretter (Cot.), It. barutare, burattare, to bolt flour; burato, bolting cloth. And as the agitation of cream in a churn is closely analogous to that of the meal in a bolter. It. barútola (Fl.), Castrais barato, Fr. barate, are applied to a churn for butter.
It must be observed that Diez' derivation of Fr. boulter from It. burato, bolt-ing-cloth, and that from Fr. bure, bureau, coarse, undyed cloth of the wool of brown sheep, accounts only for the sense of bolt-ing meal; and we must suppose that the name was extended by analogy to the act of churning and the idea of agitation in general. But it is extremely unlikely that a designation having no reference to the re-semblance between the operations of bolt-ing and churning should have been trans-ferred from the former operation to the latter, while nothing would be more na-tural than the application of a term sig-nifying violent agitation to each of those operations, of which it expresses so marked a characteristic. Moreover, the Fr. bureau, OE. borel, signifies the coarse cloth in which peasants were dressed, a material quite unfit for bolting meal, which requires stuff of a thin open tex-ture.
Our derivation, again, is supported by the analogy of G. beuteln, Du. buidelen, builen, to bolt meal, the radical sense of which is shown in Bav. beuteln, beil'n, to shake (as to shake the head, to shake down fruit from a tree, &c.); butteln, buttern, to shake, to cast to and fro. Butterglas, a bottle for shaking up salad sauce; buttel trueb (of liquids), thick from shaking. Pollitriduare, butteln.—Schm.
From builen, the contracted form of Du. buidelen, to boult meal, must be ex-plained Fr. boulenger, a baker, properly a boulter of meal.
E de fine farine (mele) vent la flour, Par la bolenge (bulting-clot) le pestour. Per bolenger (bultingge) est cevêre La flur, e le furfre (of bren) demorê. Bibelesworth in Nat. Antiq. 155.

Bomb.—Bombard. Fr. bombe, It. bomba, an iron shell to be exploded with gunpowder. From an imitation of the noise of the explosion. It. rimbombare, to resound. In E. we speak of a gun booming over the water. Du. bommen, to resound, to beat a drum, whence bomme, a drum; bombammen, to ring bells. Dan. bommer, a thundering noise; bomre, to thunder, to thump; W. bwm-bwr, a hollow sound, bwmbwry mar, the murmuring of the sea. It. bombára, any riot or hurly-burly with a clamorous noise; bombarda, any kind of gun or piece of ordnance.—Fl.
Bombast.—Bombasine. Gr. βόμβυξ, the silk-worm, raw silk. It. bombice, a silk-worm, bombicina, stuff, tiffany, bom-basine.—Altieri. The material called by this name, however, has repeatedly varied, and it is now applied to a worsted stuff.
When cotton was introduced it was confounded with silk, and called in Mid. and Mod. Greek βαμβάκιον, Mid.Lat. bambacium. It. bambagio; whence It. bambagino, Fr. bombasin, basin, cotton stuff. E. bombase, bombast, cotton.
Need you any ink and bombase.—Hollyband in R.
As cotton was used for padding clothes, bombast came to signify inflated lan-guage.
Lette none outlandish tailor take disport To stuffe thy doublet full of such bumbast. Gascoigne in R.
When the name passed into the lan-guages of Northern Europe, the tendency to give meaning to the elements of a word introduced from abroad, which has given rise to so many false etymologies, produced the Pl.D. baum-bast, G. baum-wolle, as if made from the bast or inner bark of a tree; and Kilian explains it boom-basyn, gossipium, lana lignea, sive de arbore; vulgo bombasium, q. d. bopin-sye, i. e. sericum arboreum, from boom, tree, and sijde, sije, silk.
Bond. AS. bindan, band, bunden, to bind; G. band, an implement of binding, a string, tie, band; pl. bande, bonds, ties. ODu. bond, a ligature, tie, agreement.—Kil. In legal language, a bond is an in-strument by which a person binds himself under a penalty to perform some act.
Bone. G. bein, the leg, bone of the leg, the shank; achsel bein, brust-bein, the shoulder-bone, breast-bone. Du. been, a bone in general, and also the leg. Now the office of a bone is to act as a support to the human frame, and this is especially the function of the leg bone, to which the term is appropriated in G. and Du. We may therefore fairly identify bone with the W. bon, a stem or base, a stock, stump, or trunk; and in fact we find the word in W. as in G. and Du. assuming the special signification of leg: W. bonog, having a stem or stalk, also thick-shank-ed; bongam, crook-shanked; bondew, bonfras, thick-legged, from teu, bras, thick.
Bonfire. A large fire lit in the open air on occasion of public rejoicing. Named from the beacon-fires formerly in use to raise an alarm over a wide extent of country. Dan. baun, a beacon, a word of which we have traces in several Eng-lish names, as Banbury, Banstead.

The last of these, a field is still called the Beacon field, and near Banbury is a lofty hill called Crouch Hill, where a cross (or crouch) probably served to mark the place of the former beacon. The origin of the word is probably the W. ban, high, lofty, tall, whence ban-ffagl, a lofty blaze, a bonfire. Many lofty hills are called Beacons in E. and Ban in W.; as the Brecknockshire Banns, or Vanns, in W. Banau Brycheiniog, also called Brecknock Beacons. Perhaps, however, the word may signify merely a fire of buns, or dry stalks for making a roaring blaze. Bonnefyre, feu de behourdis.—Palsgr. Mrs. Baker explains bun, the stubble of beans, often cut for burning and lighting fires. Bun, a dry stalk.—Hal.
Bonnet. Fr. bonnet, Gael. bonaid, a head-dress. The word seems of Scandinavian origin. From bo, boa, bua, to dress, to set in order, bonad, reparation, dress. Hufwud-bonad, head-dress; wägg-bonad, wall hangings, tapestry. But bonad does not appear to have been used by itself for head-dress.
Booby. The character of folly is generally represented by the image of one gaping and staring about, wondering at everything. Thus from the syllable ba, representing the opening of the mouth, are formed Fr. baier, béer, to gape, and thence Rouchi baia, the mouth, and fig. one who stands staring with open mouth; babaie, babin, Wall. bäber, babau, boubair, boubié. It. babbéo, a simpleton, booby, blockhead. Ir. bobo! interj. of wonder; Sp. bobo, foolish. On the same principle from badare, to gape, Fr. badaud, a fool, dolt, ass, gaping hoyden.—Cot.; from gape, E. dial. gaby, a silly fellow, gaping about with vacant stare.—Mrs. Baker, and from AS. ganian, to yawn, E. gawney, a simpleton.—Mrs. Baker.
Book. AS. boc. Goth. boka, letter, writing; bokos, the scriptures; bokareis, a scribe; G. buch-stab, a letter; OSlav. bukui, a letter; Russ. bukva, bukvdry, the alphabet. Diefenbach suggests that the origin is buki, signifying beech, the name of the letter b, the first consonant of the alphabet, although in the OG. and Gael. alphabet that letter is named from the birch instead of the beech.
Boom. In nautical language, which is mostly derived from the Low German and Scandinavian dialects, a boom is a beam or pole used in keeping the sails in position, or a large beam stretched across the mouth of a harbour for defence. Du. boom, a tree, pole, beam, bolt.—Kil.

To Boom. To sound loud and dull like a gun. Du. bommen. See Bomb.
Boon. A favour, a good turn or request.—Bailey. The latter is the original meaning. AS. ben, bene, petition, prayer. Thin ben is gehyred, Luke i. 13. ON. beidne, been, bön, desire, prayer, petition, from beida (E. bid), to ask.
Boor. A peasant, countryman, clown. Du. boer, G. bauer, from Du. bouwen, to till, cultivate, build, G. bauen, to cultivate, inhabit, build, ON. bua, to prepare, set in order, dress, till, inhabit. From the sense of inhabiting we have neighbour, G. nachbar, one who dwells nigh. From the participle present, ON. buandi, boandi, comes bondi, the cultivator, the possessor of the farm, master of the house, hus-band. See Bown, Busk, Build.
Boose. A stall for cattle.—Hal. Boos, bose, netis stall.—Pr. Pm. AS. bosig, bosg, bosih, ON. bós, a stall. Perhaps from OW. boutig, literally cow-house. OW. boutig, stabulum.—Ox. Gl. in Phil. Trans. 1860, p. 232. W. ty Gael. tigh, house. But more likely from Sw. dial. bas, which signifies not only straw, litter, but stall, as a lying-place for cattle. Basa, to strew with straw, to litter; bosu, busu, hund-busa, swinbusa, a lying-place for dogs or swine, dog-kennel, pig-sty. N. bos, remnants of hay or straw, chaff.
Boot. Fr. botte. Du. bote, boten-shoen, pero, calceus rusticus e crudo corio.—Kil. Swab. bossen, short boots.—Schm. It would appear that in Kilian's time the Du. bote was similar to the Irish brogue and Indian mocassin, a bag of skin or leather, enveloping the foot and laced on the instep. It is commonly explained as identical with It. botta, Sp. Prov. bota, Fr. botte, a hollow skin, a vessel for holding liquids. See Butt.
To Boot.—Bootless. To boot, to aid, help, succour.—Bailey. Boot of bale, remedy of evil, relief from sorrow. To give a thing to boot is to give it into the bargain, to give it to improve the conditions already proposed or agreed on. Clement the cobeler cast off his cloke And to the nywe fayre nempned it to selle; Hick the hakeneyman hitte his hod after— There were chapmen ychose the chaffare to preise That he that hadde the hod sholde nat habbe the cloke, The betere thing by arbitours sholde bote the werse.—P. P. i. e. should contribute something to make the bargain equal. Bootless, without advantage, not contributing to further the end we have in view. Du. boete, baete, aid, remedy, amendment ; boeten, to mend, and hence to fine, to expiate ; boeten den dorst, to quench one's thirst ; boeten het vier, AS. betan fyr, to bete the fire, properly to mend the fire, but used in the sense of laying or lighting it, struere ignem, admovere titiones.—Kil. ON. bót, pl. bætr, amendment, reparation, recovery ; yfirbót, making good again ; bæta, to make better, to repair, to patch, to cure ; Sw. bäta, to boot, to profit ; Goth. botjan, to profit, to be of advantage ; aftragabotjan, to restore, repair. See To Bete.

Booth. This word is widely spread in the sense of a slight erection, a shelter of branches, boards, &c. Gael. both, bothag, bothan, a bothy, cottage, hut, tent, bower. Bohem. bauda, budka, a hut, a shop ; budowati, to build ; Pol. buda, a booth or shed, budowai, to build. ON. bud, a hut or tent, a shed, a shop. OSw. sædes-bod, a granary ; mat-bod, a cupboard. Du. boede, boeye, a hut, cupboard, barn, cellar. Neither G. bauen, to build, nor E. abode, afford a satisfactory explanation. In the Slavonic languages the word signifying to build seems a derivative rather than a root. See Bower.

Booty. It is admitted that Fr. butin. It. bottino, are derived from G. beute. The Sw. byte points to the verb byta, to exchange or divide, as the origin of the word, the primary signification of which would thus be the division of the spoil. Halfva bytning af alt that rof. A half share of all that spoil. Hist. Alexand. Mag. in Ihre. Fr. butin is explained by Palsgr. p. 266, schare of a man of a prise in warre time. And so in ON. the booty taken in war is called grip-deildi and hlut-skipti, from deila and skipta, to divide.

Borachio. A wine-skin, and metaphorically a drunkard. Sp. borracha, a leather bag or bottle for wine. Gael. borracha, a bladder, from borra, to swell. See Burgeon.

Border. Fr. bordure, a border, welt, hem or gard of a garment, from bord, edge, margin. ON. bord, limbus, ora, extremitas ; bordi, fimbria, limbus.

Bore. The flow of the tide in a single large wave up certain estuaries. Tumbling from the Gallic coast the victorious tenth wave shall ride like the bore over all the rest.—Burke in R.

ON. bára, a wave, N. baara, wave, swell ; bara, kvit-bæra, to surge, to foam.

To Bore, 1.—Burin. G. bohren, ON. bora, Lat. forare, Magy. furni, to bore, furó, a borer ; Fin. puras, a chisel, terebra sculptoria ; purastoa, scalpo, terebro, sculpo ; Ostiak. por, par, a borer, piercer. The Fin. purra, to bite, leaves little doubt as to the primitive image from whence the expression is taken, the action of gnawing affording the most obvious analogy from whence to name the operation of a cutting instrument, or the gradual working a hole in anything. The ON. bit is used to signify the point or edge of a knife ; bitr, sharp, pointed. We speak in E. of an edge that will not bite, and it is doubtless in the sense of ON. bit that the term centre-bit is applied to an instrument for boring. The corresponding forms in Lap. are parret, to bite, and thence to eat ; and parrets, an awl, a borer.

The analogy between the operation of a cutting instrument and the act of gnawing or biting leads to the application of Fin. puru, Esthon. purro, to anything comminuted by either kind of action, as Fin. puru, chewed food for infants, sahan puru, Esthon. pu purro (saha = saw ; pu = wood), OHG. uzboro, urboro, sawdust, the gnawings as it were of the saw or borer. Another derivation from Fin. purra, to bite, is purin, dens mordens vel caninus, the equivalent of the It. borino, bolino, a graver's small pounce, a sharp chisel for cutting stone with—Flor. ; Fr. and E. burin, an engraver's chisel, the tool with which he bites into his copper plate. Compare Manx birrag, a sharp-pointed tooth, or anything pointed, Gael. biorag, a tusk, which are probably from the same root. Fin. puras, a chisel, differs only in termination.

To Bore, 2. To bore in the metaphorical sense may have acquired its meaning in the same way as G. drillen, to pierce, also to harass with work or perpetual requests, to importune. But probably the E. use of the word would be better explained on the supposition that it was originally bur. It. lappolone, a great bur, an importunate fellow that will stick as close as a bur to one ; lappolare, to stick unto as a bur.—Fl. I could not tell how to rid myself better of the troublesome bur, than by getting him into the discourse of Hunting.—Return from Parnassus in R.

Waldemar knew the old diplomatist's importunity and weariness by report, but he had not yet learned the art of being blandly insolent, and thus could not shake off the old burr.—Waldemar Krone (1867), i. 106.
Lang, pegou, one who sticks to you like pitch, a bore, Port. pego, pitch.
Boreal. Lat. Boreas, the North Wind, borealis, northern. Russ. borei, the N. wind; burya, tempest, storm.
Borough. A word spread over all the Teutonic and Romance languages. AS. burg, burh, byrig, a city; whence the frequent occurrence of the termination bury in the names of English towns, Canterbury, Newbury, &c. Goth. baurgs, ON. borg, It. borgo, Fr. bourg. Gr. πύργος, a tower, is probably radically connected. 'Castellum parvum quem burgum vocant.'—Vegetius in Diez. Hence must have arisen burgensis, a citizen, giving rise to It. borgese, Fr. bourgeois, E. burgess, a citizen.
The origin seems to be the Goth. bairgan, AS. beorgan, to protect, to keep, preserve; G. bergen, to save, to conceal, withhold; Dan. bierge, to save; Sw. berga, to save, to take in, to contain. Solen bergas, the sun sets. The primitive idea seems to bring under cover. See Bury, Borrow.
Borrel. A plain rude fellow, a boor.—Bailey. Frequently applied to laymen in contradistinction to the more polished clergy.
But wele I wot as nice fresche and gay Som of hem ben as borel folkis ben.
And that unsittynge is to here degre.
Occleve in Halliwell.
The origin of the term is the OFr. borel, burel, coarse cloth made of the undyed wool of brown sheep, the ordinary dress of the lower orders, as it still is in parts of Savoy and Switzerland. See Bureau. In like manner It. bizocco (from bizo, grey), primarily signifying coarse brown cloth, is used in the sense of coarse, clownish, unpolished, rustic, rude.—Altieri. So Du. 't graauw, the populace, from their grey clothing.
To Borrow. Properly to obtain money on security, from AS. borg, borh, a surety, pledge, loan. 'Gif thu feoh to borh gesylle,' if thou give money on loan. G. bürge, a surety, bail; bürgen, to become a surety, to give bail or answer for another. AS. beorgan, to protect, secure.
Borsholder.—Borowholder. A head-borough or chief constable. By the Saxon laws there was a general system of bail throughout the country, by which each man was answerable for his neighbour.
'Ic wille that ælc man sy under borge ge binnan burgum ge butan burgum.' I will that every man be under bail, both within towns and without.—Laws of Edgar in Bosworth.
Hence 'borhes ealdor,' the chief of the 'borh,' or system of bail, corrupted, when that system was forgotten, into borsholder, borough-holder, or head-borough, as if from the verb to hold, and borough in the sense of a town.
Bosh. A word lately introduced from our intercourse with the East, signifying nonsense. Turk. bosh, empty, vain, useless, agreeing in a singular manner with Sc. boss, hollow, empty, poor.
Boss. I. Fr. bosse, a bunch or hump, any round swelling, a wen, botch, knob, knot, knur.—Cot. Du. bosse, busse, the boss or knob of a buckler; bos, bussel, a bunch, tuft, bundle.
Words signifying a lump or protuberance have commonly also the sense of striking, knocking, whether from the fact that a blow is apt to produce a swelling in the body struck, or because a blow can only be given by a body of a certain mass, as we speak of a thumping potato, a bouncing baby; or perhaps it may be that the protuberance is considered as a projection, a pushing or striking out. The Gael. cnoc, an eminence, agrees with E. knock; while Gael. cnag signifies both a knock and a knob; cnap, a knob, a boss, a little blow. E. cob, a blow, and also a lump or piece.—Hal. A bump is used in both senses of a blow and a protuberance. Bunch, which now signifies a knob, was formerly used in the sense of knocking. Du. butsen, botsen, to strike; butse, botse, a swelling, bump, botch.
The origin of boss may accordingly be found in Bav. buschen, to strike so as to make a hollow sound, to give a hollow sound; boschen, bossen, Du. bossen. It. bussare, Swiss Rom. boussi, bussi, bussa (Bridel), to knock or strike.
Then from the peculiar resonance of a blow on a hollow object, or perhaps also from looking at the projection from within instead of without, the Sc. boss, bos, boise is used in the sense of hollow, empty, poor, destitute. A boss sound, that which is emitted by a hollow body.—Jam. Bos bucklers, hollow bucklers.—D. V. The boss of the side, the hollow between the ribs and the side.—Jam.
Botany. Gr. βοτάνη, a herb, plant, βοτανίζω, to pick or cull plants, βοτανικός, of or belonging to plants, ἡ βοτανική

(τέχνη understood), the science or knowledge of plants.
Botch. It seems that botch is a mere dialectic variation of boss, as Fr. bosse becomes in the Northern dialects boche.—Decorde, Héc.art. Bochu, bossu, a hump-back.—Dec. Du. botsen, butsen, to knock, to strike; botse, butse, a knock, contusion; butse, a bump or swelling, a plague-boil—Kil.; bots, buts, a boil or swelling—Halma. A boil, pimple, blister, was called a push; what pushes outwards.—Hal. And so we speak of an eruption, of boils breaking out.
On the other hand, It. boccia, a bubble, by met. any round ball or bowl to play withal, the bud of a flower; any kind of plain round vial or cupping glass—Fl.; bozza, a pock, blain, botch, bile, or plague sore; any plain round viol glass; bozzo, empty or hollow, as a push or windgall.—Fl.
Here the radical image seems a bubble, from the dashing of water. Parmesan poccia, a slop, mess, puddle. It. pozzo, pozzanghera, a plash or slough or pitful of standing waters.—Fl. E. dial, to podge, to stir and mix together; podge, a pit, a cesspool; poss, to dash about; a water-fall.—Hal.
To Botch. The origin of the word is somewhat puzzling. On the one hand we have Swiss batschen, batschen, to smack, to give a sounding blow, to fall with a sound : batsch, a lump of something soft; batsch, a patch; batschen, patschen, to botch or patch, to put on a patch.—Stalder.
On the other hand, corresponding to ON. bæta, to make better, to mend, to patch, we have OHG. buazen, gipuozan, to mend, scuohbuzere, a botcher of shoes, a cobbler; G. büssen, to mend (kettles, shoes, nets, &c.) ; kessel-büsser, a tinker; schuhbüsser, schuhbosser, bosser, bässer, a cobbler.
Again, the notion of unskilful work is commonly expressed by the figure of dabbling in the wet, and thus to botch in the sense of clumsy working seems connected with Mantuan poccia, a slop, mess, puddle; pocciar, to dip in liquid (to dabble), to work without order or knowledge; It. bozza, an imperfect and bungling piece of work, the first rough draught of any work.—Fl. Podge, a pit, a cess-pool; to podge, to stir and mix together.—Hal. See To Bodge.
Bote. House-bote, fire-bote, signify a supply of wood to repair the house, to mend the fire. Si quis burgbotam sive brigbotam, i. e. burgi vel pontis refectionem, &c.—Leg. Canut. AS. bót, reparation. See To Bete.
Both. Boa two.—Ancren Riwle, 212. AS. Butu, butwo, batwa; OSax. bethia, bède; ON. báðir, gen. beggja; Goth, ba, baioths; Sanscr. ubhau; Lith. abbu, abbudu; Lett, abbi, abbi-diwi; Slavon. oba, oba-dwa; Lat. ambo.—Dief. Lith. Mudu, Wedu, we two, Judu, Judwi, you two, Jidwi, they two.
* To Bother. To confuse with noise, from pudder, pother, noise, disturbance.
With the din of which tube my head you so bother That I scarce can distinguish my right ear from t' other.—Swift in R.
Du. bulderen, to rage, bluster, make a disturbance; G. poltern, to make a noise, to do anything with noise and bustle; Dan. bulder, noise, turmoil, hurly-burly. N. potra, putra, to simmer, whisper, mutter.
Bott. A belly-worm, especially in horses. Gael, botus, a bott; boiteag, a maggot. Bouds, maggots in barley.—Bailey.
Bottle. 1. It. bottiglia, Fr. bouteille, dim. of botta, botte, boute, a vessel for holding liquids.—Diez. Gael, buideal, a cask, a bottle. See Butt. Bouteille, however, is also a bubble, and E. bottle is provincially used in the same sense. Pl.D. buddeln, to froth as beer; buddl, a bottle.—Danneil. Prov. botola, a tumour. A bubble is often taken as the type of anything round and hollow.
2. From Fr. botte, a bunch, bundle, is the dim. botel, boteau, a wisp, bunch. Bret, botel foenn, a bottle of hay. Gael. boiteal, boitean, a bundle of straw or hay. Du. bot, botte, knock, stroke, blow.—Kil. See Boss.
Bottom. AS. botm, the lowest part, depth. 'Fyre to botme,' to the fiery abyss.—Cædm. Du. bodem; G. boden; ON. botn, Dan. bund, Lat. fundus. The Gr. βυθος, βένθος, a depth, and ἄβυσσος, an abyss or bottomless pit, seem developments of the same root, another modification of which may be preserved in Gael, bun, a root, stock, stump, bottom, foundation; w. bôn, stem or base, stock, butt end. See Bound.
2. A bottom is also used in the sense of a ball of thread, whence the name of the weaver in Midsummer Night's Dream. The word bottom or bothum was also used in OE. for a bud. Both applications are from the root bot, both, in the sense of projection, round lump, boss. A bottom of thread, like bobbin, signifies a short thick mass. The w. has bot, a round body; both, boss of a buckler, nave of a wheel; bothel, pothel, a blister, pimple—Richards; bothog, round, botwm, a boss, a button; Fr. bouton, a bud. For the connection between the sense of a lump or projection and that of striking or thrusting, see Boss.
Bough. The branch of a tree. AS. bog, boh, from bugan, to bow, bend.
Bough-pot, or Bow-pot, a jar to set boughs in for ornament, as a nosegay.
' Take care my house be handsome, And the new stools set out, and boughs and rushes And flowers for the windows, and the Turkey carpet.'— 'Why would you venture so fondly on the strowings. There's mighty matter in them, I assure you, And in the spreading of a bough-pot.' B. and F. Coxcomb, iv. 3.
Bought. — Bout. — Bight. The boughts of a rope are the separate folds when coiled in a circle, from AS. bugan, to bow or bend; and as the coils come round and round in similar circles, a bout, with a slight difference of spelling, is applied to the turns of things that succeed one another at certain intervals, as a bout of fair or foul weather. So It. volta, a turn or time, an occasion, from volgere, to turn.
A bight is merely another pronunciation of the same word, signifying in nautical language a coil of rope, the hollow of a bay. The Bight of Benin, the bay of Benin. Dan. bugt, bend, turn, winding, gulf, bay.
* Boulder.—Boulderstone. Bowlder, a large stone rounded by the action of water, a large pebble.—Webster. Sw. dial. bullersten, the larger kind of pebbles, in contrast to klappersten, the smaller ones. From Sw. bullra, E. dial. bolder, to make a loud noise, to thunder. A thundering big one is a common exaggeration. But as klappersten for the smaller pebbles is undoubtedly from the rattle they make when thrown together, probably buller or bolder may represent the deeper sound made by the larger stones when rolling in a stream.
It was an awful sight to see the Visp roaring under one of the bridges that remained, and to hear the groans and heavy thuds of the boulders that were being hurried on and dashed against each other by the torrent.—Bonny, Alpine Regions, p. 136.
Even in the absence of actual experience of such sounds as the foregoing, the rounded shape of the stones would suggest the notion of the continual knocking to which they must have been subjected.
To Boult. See To Bolt, 2.
To Bounce. Primarily to strike, then to do anything in a violent startling way, to jump, to spring. Bunche, tundo, trudo:—he buncheth me and beateth me—he came home with his face all to-bounced, contusâ.—Pr. Pm.
The sound of a blow is imitated in Pl.D. by Buns or Buns; whence bujsen, bamsen, bunsen, to strike against a thing so as to give a dull sound; an de dor bunsen, to knock at the door.
Yet still he bet and bounst upon the dore And thundered strokes thereon so hideously That all the pece he shaked from the flore And filled all the house with fear and great up-roar.—F. Q.
An de dor ankloppen dat idt bunset, to knock till it sounds again. He fult dat et bunsede, he fell so that it sounded.
Hence bunsk in the sense of the E. bouncing, thumping, strapping, as the vulgar whapper, bumper, for anything large of its kind. ' Een bunsken appel, jungen,' a bouncing apple, baby.—Brem. Wtb.
Du. bons, a blow, bonzen, to knock.—Halma. See Bunch.
To Bound. Fr. bondir, to spring, to leap. The original meaning is probably simply to strike, as that of E. bounce, which is frequently used in the same sense with bound. The origin seems an imitation of the sounding blow of an elastic body, the verb bondir in OFr. and Prov., and the equivalent bonir in Catalan, being used in the sense of resounding.
No i ausiratz parlar, ni motz brugir, Ni gacha frestelar, ni cor bondir.
You will not hear talking nor a word murmur. Nor a centinel whistle, nor horn sound. Raynouard.
Langued. bounbounejha, to hum; boundina, to hum, to resound.
Bound.—Boundary. Fr. borne, bone, a bound, limit, mere, march.—Cot. Mid. Lat. bodina, butina, bunda, bonna.
' Multi ibi limites quos illi bonnas vocant, suorum recognoverunt agrorum.' 'Alodus sic est circumcinctus et divisus per bodinas fixas et loca designata.'—Charter of K. Robert to a monastery in Poitou.—Ducange. Bodinare, debodinare, to set out by metes and bounds. Probably from the Celtic root bon, bun, a stock, bottom, root (see Bottom). Bret. men-bonn, a boundary stone (men = stone); bonna, to set bounds, to fix limits. The entire value of such bounds depends upon their fixedness. Gael. bunaiteach, steady, firm, fixed. It is remarkable that we find very nearly the same variation in the mode of spelling the word for bound, as was formerly shown in the case of bottom, which was also referred to the same Celtic root.
Bound.—Bown. The meaning of bound, when we speak of a ship bound for New York, is, prepared for, ready to go to, addressed to.
He of adventure happed hire to mete Amid the toun right in the quikkest strete As she was boun to go the way forth right Toward the garden.—Chaucer in R.
It is the participle past buinn, prepared, ready, of the ON. verb bua, to prepare, set out, address.
Bounty. Fr. bonté, Lat. bonitas, from bonus, good.
Bourd. A jest, sport, game. Immediately from Fr. bourde in the same sense, and that probably from a Celtic root. Bret. bourd, deceit, trick, joke; Gael. burd, burt, mockery, ridicule; buirte, a jibe, taunt, repartee. As the Gael. has also buirleadh, language of folly or ridicule, it is probable that the It. burlare, to banter or laugh at, must be referred to the same root, according to the well-known interchange of d and l.
The notion of deceiving or making a fool of one is often expressed by reference to some artifice employed for diverting his attention, whether by sound or gesticulation. Thus we speak of humming one for deceiving him, and in the same way to bam is to make fun of one; a bam, a false tale or jeer—Hal.; from Du. bommen, to hum. Now we shall see in the next article that the meaning of the root bourd is to hum. Gael. burdan, a humming noise—Macleod; a sing-song, a jibe—Shaw; bururus, warbling, purling, gurgling. Bav. burren, brummen, sausen, brausen, to hum, buzz, grumble; Sw. purra, to take one in, to trick, to cheat.
Bourdon.—Burden. Bourdon, the drone of a bagpipe, hence musical accompaniment, repetition of sounds with or without sense at the end of stated divisions of a song, analogous to Fr. tinton, the ting of a bell, the burden of a song.—Cot.
And there in mourning spend their time With wailful tunes, while wolves do howl and barke And seem to bear a bourdon to their plaint.
Spenser in R.
Fr. bourdon, a drone of a bagpipe, a drone or dor-bee, also the humming or buzzing of bees.—Cot. Sp. bordon, the bass of a stringed instrument, or of an organ. Gael. burdan, a humming noise, the imitative character of which is supported by the use of durdan in the same sense; durd, to hum as a bee, to mutter.
Bourdon.—Borden. Fr. bourdon, a pilgrim's staff, the big end of a club, a pike or spear; bourdon d'un moulin à vent, a mill-post.—Cot. Prov. bordo, a staff, crutch, cudgel, lance; It. bordone, a staff, a prop.
Bourn. 1. A limit. Fr. borne, a corruption of bonne, identical with E. bound, which see.
2. Sc. burn, a brook; Goth. brunna, a spring, Du. borne, a well, spring, spring-water; Gael. burn, fresh water. See Burgeon.
* To Bouse. Du. buizen, Swiss bausen, to take deep draughts, drink deep, to tope. G. bausen, pausen, pausten, to swell, puff out. Sw. pusta, to take breath. Perhaps the radical meaning of the word may be, like quaff, to draw a deep breath. So Sc. souch, souf, to draw a deep breath, G. saufen, to drink deep.
The foregoing derivation seems, on the whole, more probable than the one formerly given from Du. buyse, a flagon, whence buysen, to drink deep, to indulge in his cups; buys, drunken.
We shule preye the hayward hom to our hous— Drink to him dearly of full good bous.
Man in the Moon.
Comp. Du. kroes, a cup; kroesen, to tope; W. pot, a pot, potio, to tipple.
Bow. G. bug, curvature, bending, bending of a joint; knie-bug, schenkel-bug, schulter-bug. When used alone it commonly signifies the shoulder-joint, explaining Sw. bog, Dan. bov, shoulder of a quadruped; bovblad, shoulder-blade. It is probably through this latter signification, and not in the sense of curvature in general, that ON. bogr, Sw. bog, Dan. bov, are applied to the bow of a ship, in Fr. épaule du vaisseau, the shoulder of the vessel.
A different modification gives ON. bógi, Sw. båge, Dan. bue, G. bogen, an arch, bending, bow to shoot with. W. bwa, Gael. bogha, a bow.
Corresponding verbal forms are Goth. biugan, ON. buga, beygja, AS. bugan, beogan, Du. buigen, G. biegen, to bow, bend; Sw. buga, to bow or incline the head; ON. bogna, bugna, Sw. bågna, bugna, Dan. bovne, bugne, to bulge, bend, belly out.

It would seem that the notion of a bent or rounded object must be attained antecedent to the more abstract conception of the act of bending. The foregoing forms may accordingly be derived with much plausibility from the figure of a bubble, signified by forms like Gael. bolg, Pol. bulka, or, with inversion of the liquid, Fr. boucle, Sw. dial. bogla, W. bog-lyn, largely illustrated under Bulk, Buckle. From the former modification we have ON. bolgna, to puff up, swell, passing on the one hand by the loss of the g into Dan. bulne, OE. bolne, to swell, and on the other by the loss of the l into ON. bogna, bugna, to bulge, bow, give in to, yield. From the other form are G. buckel, a protuberance, a hump on the back; sich aufbuckeln (Schm.), to raise the back like a cat; then by the loss of the l, Bav. bucken, to bend down, to bow; buck, a bending, prominence, hill. G. bücken, Sw. bucka, bocka, Dan. bukke, to stoop, bow, make obeisance. Du. zich onder jemand buigen, to yield to one, to buckle under to him. G. buckelig gehen, to stoop in walking; bückling, a bow. The l appears in a different position in ODu. bulcken, inclinare se (Kil.), as in E. bulk compared with Sw. buk, Dan. bug, convexity, belly, or in E. bulge, compared with Fr. bouge, belly of a cask. W. bog, a swelling or rising up. Sanscr. bhuj, to bend, to make crooked; (in pass.) to incline oneself; bhugna, bent, crooked. The same line of derivation seems repeated in Magy. bugy, representing the sound of bubbling or guggling; bugyni, bugyani, to bubble up, stream forth; bugyogni, to guggle, bubble, spring as water; bugya, a boil, tumour, lump; buga, bugyola, a knot, a bundle.

* BOWELS. It. budello, buello, OFr. boel, gut, bowel; Bret. bouzellou, bouellou, bowels. Lat. botulus, a sausage. Fr. boudin, a black pudding, the bowel of an animal stuffed with blood and grits. The word may probably be identical with Fris. budel, Du. hüdel, G. beutel, a sack, purse, pocket. See Boil.

BOWER. NE. boor, a parlour.—Hal. ON. bur, a separate apartment; utibur, an outhouse; AS. bur, a chamber; swefnbur, a sleeping-room; cumena-bur, guest-chamber; fata-bur, a wardrobe; Sw. hönse-bur, a hen-coop; W. bwr, an inclosure, intrenchment, bwra, a croft by a house.

BOWL.—Boll. Fr. boule, a bowl, in both senses, of a wooden ball to play with and a round vessel for drink. Sp. bola, a ball, bowl. The sense of a globular form is probably taken from the type of a bubble as in other cases. Thus we have Esthon. pul, a bubble; Fin. pullo, a drop of water; pullistaa, to puff up; pullakka, round, swollen; pulli, a round glass or flask; Lat. bulla, a bubble, a thing of similar shape, a stud, boss, knob; It. bolla, a bubble, blister, round glass phial, stud, boss; ON. bola, a bubble; bolli, a cup; Pl.D. bol, globular, spherical; Du. bol, swollen, puffy, hollow, convex, a ball, a globe or spherical body, the head, the crown of a hat, bulb of an onion; bolle-ken, the boll or round seed-vessel of flax; Bav. bollen, globular body, round bead, boll of flax; rossbollen, horsedung; mausbollelein, mousedung; OHG. bolla, polla, bulla in aqua, folliculus; hirni-polla, MHG. hirnbolla, the skull or brain-pan; bolle, a bud, a wine-can; AS. bolla, a pot, bowl; heafod bolla, the head. A similar series of designations from the image of a bubble may be seen in Fin. kuppo, a bubble, boil, tumour; kup-ula, kuppelo, a ball; kupu, the crop of a bird, belly, head of a cabbage, wisp of straw; kupukka, anything globular. See Bulk.

BOX. A hollow wooden case, as well as the name of a shrub whose wood is peculiarly adapted for turning boxes and similar objects. AS. box in both senses. Gr. πύξος, the box-tree, πύξις, a box; Lat. buxus, the box-tree and articles made of it; G. büchse, a box, the barrel of a gun, buchsbaum, the box-tree; It. bosso, box-tree, bossola, a box, hollow place; Fr. buis, Bret. beuz, Bohem. pusspan, box-tree; pusska, a box. Du. busse, a box, bussken, a little box; Pl.D. büsse, büske. Hence, with an inversion of the s and k, as in AS. acsian, E. ask, we arrive at the E. box, without the need of resorting to an immediate derivation from the Latin. The box of a coach is commonly explained as if it had formerly been an actual box, containing the implements for keeping the coach in order. It is more probably from the G. bock, signifying in the first instance a buck or he-goat, then applied in general to a trestle or support upon which anything rests, and to a coach-box in particular. See Crab, Cable. In like manner the Pol. koziel, a buck, is applied to a coach-box, while the plural kozly is used in the sense of a sawing-block, trestle, painter's easel, &c.

To Box. To fight with the fists. From the Dan. bask, a sounding blow, baske, to slap, thwack, flap, by the same inversion of s and k, as noticed under Box. It is plainly an imitative word, parallel with OE. posh, to strike. Swiss batschen, to smack the hand; bätschen, to give a loud smack, to fall with a noise. Heligoland batsken, to box the ears. Lett. bauksch represents the sound of a blow; baukscheht, to give a sounding blow; buksteht, to give a blow with the fists.

Boy. G. bube, Swiss bub, bue. Swab. buah, a grown youth; Cimbr. pube, boy, youth, unmarried man; Swiss Rom. boubo, bouibo, boy; bouba, bouéba, little girl. Lat. pupus, a boy; pupa, a girl, a doll.

To Brabble. A variation of babble, representing the confused sound of simultaneous talking. In like manner the It. has bulicame and brulicame, a bubbling motion; Fr. boussole, Sp. bruxula, a compass; Fr. boiste, Prov. brostia, a box. Du. brabbelen, to stammer, jabber, confuse, disturb, quarrel; Bohem. breptati, to stutter, murmur, babble.

Brace. The different meanings of the word brace may all be reduced to the idea of straining, compressing, confining, binding together, from a root brak, which has many representatives in the other European languages. See Brake. To brace is to draw together, whence a bracing air, one which draws up the springs of life; a pair of braces, the bands which hold up the trowsers. A brace on board a ship, It. braca, is a rope holding up a weight or resisting a strain. A brace is also a pair of things united together in the first instance by a physical tie, and then merely in our mode of considering them.

Bracelet. Bracelet, an ornamental band round the wrist; bracer, a guard to protect the arm of an archer from the string of his bow. Fr. brasselet, a bracelet, wristband, or bracer—Cot. ; OFr. brassard, Sp. bracil, armour for the arm, from bras, the arm.

Brach, Prov. brae, bracon, braquet, Fr. braque, brachet, Sp. Ptg. braco, It. bracco, a setter, spaniel, beagle, dog that hunts by scent. MHG. bracke, s. s., dog in general; ON. rakki, dog; Sw. rakka, bitch; Du. rakke, whelp; AS. ræce, OE. ratch, rack, scenting dog, odorinsecus.—Pr. Pm.

Brack. A breach, flaw, or defect, from break. Fr. briche, a brack or breach in a wall, &c.—Cot.
Floods drown no fields before they find a brack. Mirror for Mag. in R.

You may find time in eternity, Deceit and violence in heavenly justice— Ere stain or brack in her sweet reputation. B. and F.

G. brechen, to break (sometimes also used in the sense of failing, as die Augen brechen ihm, his eyes are failing him), gebrechen, to want, to be wanting; want, need, fault, defect; Du. braecke, ghebreck, breach, want, defect.—Kil. AS. brec, Pl.D. brek, want, need, fault; ON. brek, defect. On the same principle from the ON. bresta, to crack, to break, to burst, is derived brestr, a crack, flaw, defect, moral or physical.

Brack.—Brackish. Water rendered unpalatable by a mixture of salt. One of the numerous cases in which we have to halt between two derivations. Gael, bracha, suppuration, putrefaction; brach shuileach, blear-eyed; Prov. brae, pus, matter, mud, filth; el brae e la ordura del mun, the filth and ordure of the world—Rayn.; It. braco, brago, a bog or puddle; OFr. brae, braic, bray, mud; Rouchi breuque, mud, clay.—Hdcart. Then as an adj., Prov. brae, bragos, OFr. brageux, foul, dirty. 'La ville ou y avait eaues et sourses moult brageuses.'—Monstrelet in Rayn. Thus brack, which signifies in the first instance water contaminated by dirt, might easily be applied to water spoilt for drinking by other means, as by a mixture of sea water. But upon the whole I am inclined to think that the application to water contaminated with salt is derived from the G. and Du. brack, wrack, refuse, damaged; dicitur de mercibus quibusdam minus probis.—Kil. Brak-goed, merces submersae, salo sive aquâ marinâ corruptæ.—Kil. Pl.D. brakke grund, land spoilt by an overflow of sea water; Du. brakke torf, turf made offensive by a mixture of sulphur (where the meaning would well agree with the sense of the Gael, and Prov. root); wrack, brack, acidus, salsus.—Kil. See Broker. From the sense of water unfit for drinking from a mixture of salt, the word passed on to signify salt water in general, and the diminutive brackish was appropriated to the original sense. The entrellis eik far in the fludis brake I sal slyng.—D. V. in R.

Bracket. A bracket is properly a cramp-iron holding things together; then a stand cramped to a wall. Brackets in printing are claws holding together an isolated part of the text. Fr. brague, a mortise for holding things together—

Cot.; Piedm. braga, an iron for holding or binding anything together.—Zalli. From brake in the sense of constraining. See Brace, Brake.
To Brag.—Brave. Primarily to crack, to make a noise, to thrust oneself on people's notice by noise, swagger, boasting, or by gaudy dress and show. Fr. braguer, to flaunt, brave, brag or jet it; braguard, gay, gallant, flaunting, also braggard, bragging.—Cot. ON. braka, Dan. brag, crack, crash; ON. braka, to crash, to crack, also insolenter se gerere—Haldorsen; Gael. bragha, a burst, explosion; bragaireachd, empty pride, vain glory, boasting; Bret. braga, se pavaner, marcher d'une manière fière, se donner trop de licence, se parer de beaux habits. Langued. bragà, to strut, to make ostentation of his equipage, riches, &c. Swiss Rom. braga, vanter une chose.—Vocab. de Vaud. Lith. braszketi, to rattle, be noisy; Fris. braske, to shout, cry, make a noise; Dan. braske, to boast or brag. In like manner to crack is used for boasting, noisy ostentation.

But thereof set the miller not a tare He cracked bost and swore it nas nat so.—Chaucer.

Brag was then used in the sense of brisk, proud, smart.

Seest thou thilk same hawthorn stud How bragly it begins to bud.—Shepherd's Cal.

Equivalent forms are Gael. breagh, fine, well-dressed, splendid, beautiful, Sc. bra', braw, Bret. brao, brav, gayly dressed, handsome, fine.

Thus we are brought to the OE. brave, finely dressed, showy; bravery, finery.

From royal court I lately came (said he) Where all the braverie that eye may see—Is to be found.—Spenser in R.

The sense of courageous comes immediately from the notion of bragging and boasting. Gael. brabhdair, a noisy talkative fellow, blusterer, bully; brabhdadh, idle talk, bravado; Fr. bravache, a roisterer, swaggerer, bravacherie, boasting, vaunting, bragging of his own valour.—Cot. It. bravare and Fr. braver, to swagger, affront, flaunt in fine clothes; Sp. bravo, bullying, hectoring, brave, valiant; sumptuous, expensive, excellent, fine. Fr. brave, brave, gay, fine, gorgeous, gallant (in apparel); also proud, stately, braggard; also valiant, stout, courageous, that will carry no coals. Faire le brave, to stand upon terms, to boast of his own worth.—Cot.

Bragget. Sweet wort Hire mouth was sweet as braket or the meth.—Chaucer.

From W. brag, malt, and that from bragio, to sprout; i. e. sprouted corn.
To Braid. See Bray.
Brail.—To Brail. From Fr. braies, breeches, drawers, was formed brayele, brayete, the bridge or part of the breeches joining the two legs. A slight modification of this was brayeul, the feathers about the hawk's fundament, called by our falconers the brayle in a short-winged, and the pannel in a long-winged hawk.—Cot. From brayel, or from braie itself, is also derived Fr. desbrailler, to unbrace or let down the breeches, the opposite of which, brailler (though it does not appear in the dictionaries), would be to brace, to tie up. Rouchi bréler, to cord a bale of goods, to fasten the load of a waggon with ropes.—Hecart. Hence E. brails, the thongs of leather by which the pen-feathers of a hawk's wing were tied up; to brail up a sail, to tie it up like the wing of a hawk, in order to prevent its catching the wind.

Brain. AS. braegen; Du. breghe, breghen, breyne.

Brake.—Bray. The meanings of brake are very numerous, and the derivation entangled with influences from different sources. A brake is, 1. A bit for horses; a wooden frame in which the feet of vicious horses are confined in shoeing; an old instrument of torture; an inclosure for cattle; a carriage for breaking in horses; an instrument for checking the motion of a wheel; a mortar; a baker's kneading trough; an instrument for dressing flax or hemp; a harrow.—Hal. 2. A bushy spot, a bottom overgrown with thick tangled brushwood. 3. The plant fern. The meanings included under the first head are all reducible to the notion of constraining, confining, compressing, subduing, and it is very likely that the root brak, by which this idea is conveyed, is identical with Gael. brac, W. braich, Lat. brachium, the arm, as the type of exertion and strength. It is certain that the word for arm is, in numerous dialects, used in the sense of force, power, strength. Thus Bret. breach, Sp. brazo, Walloon bress, Wallachian bratsou, Turk bazu are used in both senses. It will be found in the foregoing examples that brake is used almost exactly in the sense of the Lat. subigere, expressing any kind of action by which something is subjected to external force, brought under control, reduced to a condition in which it is serviceable to our wants, or the instrument by which the action is exerted.

ON. braka, subigere, to subdue. In this sense must be explained the expression of breaking horses, properly braking or subduing them. To the same head must be referred brake, a horse's bit, It. braca, a horse's twitch. AS. bracan, to pound, to knead or mix up in a mortar, to rub, farinam in mortario subigere; Sp. bregar, to exert force in different ways, to bend a bow, to row, to stiffen against difficulties (se raidir contre—Taboada), to knead; Prov. brega, Corrèze bredgea, bredza, to rub (as in washing linen—Beronie), Fr. broyer, to bray in a mortar. The Fr. broyer is also used for the dressing of flax or hemp, passing it through a brake or frame consisting of boards loosely locking into each other, by means of which the fibre is stripped from the stalk or core, and brought into a serviceable condition. As there is so much of actual breaking in the operation, it is not surprising that the word has here, as in the case of horse-breaking, been confounded with the verb break, to fracture. We have thus Du. braecken het vlasch, frangere linum.—Biglotton. Fr. briser, concasser le lin. So in G. flachs brechen, while in other dialects the words are kept distinct. Pl.D. braken, Dan. brage, to break flax; Pl.D. braeken, Dan. brække, to break or fracture. It is remarkable that the term for braking flax in Lith. is braukti, signifying to sweep, to brush, to strip. The ON. brak is a frame in which skins are worked backwards and forwards through a small opening, for the purpose of incorporating them with the grease employed as a dressing. Swiss Rom. brego, a spinning-wheel.—Voc. de Vaud. In like manner Lat. subigere is used for any kind of dressing.

Sive rudem primis lanam glomerabat in usus Seu digitis subigebat opus.—Ovid.

In the case of the NE. brake, Gael. braca, a harrow, Dan. brage, to harrow (Lat. glebas subigere, segetes subigere aratris), the notion of breaking down the clods again comes to perplex our derivation.

In other cases the idea of straining or exerting force is more distinctly preserved. Thus the term brake was applied to the handle of a cross-bow, the lever by which the string was drawn up, as in Sp. bregar el arco, to bend a bow, Fr. braquer un canon, to bend or direct a cannon. The same name is given to the handle of a ship's pump, the member by which the force of the machine is exerted. It. braca, a brace on board a ship.

Brake. 2. In the sense of a thicket, cluster of bushes, bush, there is considerable difficulty in the derivation. The equivalent word in the other Teutonic dialects is frequently made to signify a marsh or swamp. Du. broeck, Pl.D. brook, a fen, marsh, low wet land; G. bruch, a marsh, or a wood in a marshy place; brook, grassy place in a heath—Overyssel Almanach; NE. brog, a swampy or bushy place—Hal.; Mid. Lat. brogilum, broilium, brolium, nemus, sylva aut saltus in quo ferarum venatio exercetur.—Duc. OFr. brogille, bregille, broil, broillet, breuil, copse-wood, cover for game, brambles, brushwood. G. dial. gebroge, gebrüche, a brake, thicket. Inquirers have thus been led in two directions, the notion of wetness leading some to connect the word with E. brook, a stream, Gr. βρέχω, to moisten, and Lat. riguus, watered, while others have considered the fundamental signification to be broken ground, with the bushes and tangled growth of such places.

The latter supposition has a remarkable confirmation in the Finnish languages, where from Esthon. murdma, to break, is formed murd, gebüsch, gebroge, a thicket, brake, bush, pasture, quarry; from Fin. murran, murtaa, to break, murrokko, sylva ubi arbores sunt vento diffractae et transversim collapsae, multitudo arborum vel nemorum diffractorum et collapsorum. And this probably was the original meaning of G. bruch, gebrüche, gebroge, E. brog or brake. A break of such a kind, or overthrow of trees by the wind, is most likely to take place in low wet ground where their roots have less hold, and when once thrown down, in northern climates, they stop the flow of water and cause the growth of peat and moss. Thus the word, which originally designated a broken mass of wood, might come to signify a swamp, as in Du. and G., as well as in the case of the E. brog above mentioned. A brake is explained in Palmer's Devonshire Glossary as 'a bottom overgrown with thick tangled brushwood.' It. fratto, broken; fratta, any thicket of brakes, brambles, bushes, or briers.—Fl.

Brake.—Bracken. 3. It may be suspected that brake, in the sense of fern, is a secondary application of the word in the sense last described, that is to say, that it may be so named as the natural growth of brakes and bushy places. It is certain that we find closely-resembling forms applied to several kinds of plants the natural growth of waste places and such as are designated by the term brake, bruch, &c. Thus we have W. bruk, heath; ON. brok, sedge; burkni, Dan. bregne, bracken or fern; Port. brejo, sweet broom, heath, or ling, also a marshy low ground or fen; Grisons bruch, heath.
It may be however that the relationship runs in the opposite direction, and E. brake, brog, G. bruch, gebröge, gebrüche, &c., may be so called in analogy with Bret. brugek, a heath, from brug, bruk, heath, or with It. brughera, thick brakes of high-grown ferns (Flor.), as places overgrown with brakes or fern, heath (Bret. bruk, brug), broom, or other plants of a like nature. The relation of brake to bracken may originally have been that of the Bret. brug, heath, to brugen, a single plant of heath. See Brush.
Bramble.—Broom. AS. bremel, Pl.D. brummel; Du. braeme, breme; Sw.G. brom, bramble; Du. brem, brom, broem, Pl.D. braam, G. bram, also Pfriemkraut, Pfriemen, broom, the leafless plant of which besoms are made.
It will be found that shrubs, bushes, brambles, and waste growths, are looked on in the first instance as a collection of twigs or shoots, and are commonly designated from the word signifying a twig. Thus in Lat. from virga, a rod or twig, virgultum, a shrub; from Servian prut, a rod, prutye, a shrub; from Bret. brous, a bud, and thence a shoot, brouskoad, bruskoad, brushwood, wood composed of twigs. Bav. brass, brosst, a shoot, Serv. hrst, young sprouts, Bret. broust, hallier, buisson fort épais, a thick bush, ground full of briers, thicket of brambles—Cot.; Fr. broussaille, a briery plot. In like manner the word bramble is from Swiss brom, a bud, young twig (brom-beisser, the bull-finch, E. bud-biter or bud-bird—Halliwell); Grisons brumbel, a bud; It. bromboli, broccoli, cabbage sprouts—Fl.; Piedm. bronbo, a vine twig; Bav. Pfropf, a shoot or twig.
The pointed shape of a young shoot led to the use of the G. Pfriem in the sense of an awl, and the word bramble itself was applied in a much wider sense than it is at present to any thorny growth, as AS. brœmbel-œppel, the thorn apple or stramonium, a plant bearing a fruit covered with spiky thorns, and in Chaucer it is used of the rose.
And swete as is the bramble flower That beareth the red hepe.—Sir Topaz.
AS. Thornas and bremelas, thorns and briars. Gen. iii. 18.
Bran. Bret. brenn, W. bran. It. brenna, brenda, Fr. bran. The fundamental signification seems preserved in Fr. bren, excrement, ordure; Rouchi bren d'oreille, ear-wax; berneux, snotty; Russ. bren, mud, dirt; Bret. brenn hesken, the refuse or droppings of the saw, sawdust. Bran is the draff or excrement of the corn, what is cast out as worthless.
Ils ressemblent le buretel Selonc l'Ecriture Divine Qui giete la blanche farine Fors de lui et retient le bren.—Ducange.
So Swiss gaggi, chaff, from gaggi, cack. Gael. brein, breun, stink; breanan, a dunghill, W. brwnt, nasty.
Branch.—Brank. We have seen under Brace and Brake many instances of the use of the root brak in the sense of strain, constrain, compress. The nasalisation of this root gives a form brank in the same sense. Hence the Sc. brank, a bridle or bit; to brank, to bridle, to restrain. The witches' branks was an iron bit for torture; Gael. brang, brancas, a halter. The same form becomes in It. branca, branchia, the fang or claw of a beast; brancaglie, all manner of gripings and clinchings; among masons and carpenters, all sorts of fastening together of stonework or timber with braces of lead or iron.—Florio. Brancare, to gripe, to clutch. Then by comparison with claws or arms, Bret. brank, It. branco, Fr. branche, the branch of a tree.
Brand. 1. A mark made by burning. G. Brandmark, Brandmahl, from brand, burning; brennen, to burn. 2. As ON. brandr, G. brand, a burning fragment of wood. A sword is called a brand because it glitters when waved about like a flaming torch. The Cid's sword on the same principle was named Tizón, from Lat. titio, a firebrand.—Diez.
The derivation from brennen, to burn, would leave nothing to be desired if the foregoing meanings stood alone. But we find It. brano, brandello, a piece or bit; brandone, a large piece of anything; a torch or firebrand; Fr. brin, a small piece of anything; brin à brin (as It. brano a brano), bit by bit, piecemeal; brindelles, the twigs of a besom; ON.

brandr, N. brand, a stick, stake, billet, as well as the blade of a sword. Thus the brand in ON. eldibrandr, E. firebrand, might signify merely a piece of wood or billet, and in the sense of a sword-blade might be explained from its likeness to a stick. The corresponding form in Gael, is brutan, a fragment, morsel, splinter, which with an initial s becomes spruan, brush-wood, fire-wood. Sc. brane-wood, fire-wood, not, as Jamieson explains it, from AS. bryne, incendium, but from the foregoing brano, brin, bruan.

Quhyn thay had beirit lyk baitit bullis, And brane-wod brynt in bailis.

To Brandish.—Brandle. To brand-ish, to make shine with shaking, to shake to and fro in the hand.—Bailey. Fr. brandir, to hurl with great force, to make a thing shake by the force it is cast with, to shine or glister with a gentle shaking; brandiller, to brandle, shake, totter, also to glisten or flash.—Cot.
Commonly explained from the notion of waving a brand or sword. But this is too confined an origin for so widely-spread a word. Manx bransey, to dash, Rouchi branier, Bret. bransella, Fr. bransler, branler, to shake.

Brandy. Formerly brandy-wine, Du. brand-wijn, brandende wijn, aqua ardens, vinum ardens.—Kil. The inflammable spirit distilled from wine. Du. brandigh, flagrans, urens.—Kil. G. branntwein; i. e. gebrannter wein, distilled wine, from brennen, to burn, to distil; weinbrenner, distiller.—Marsh.

Brangle. This word has two senses, apparently very distinct from each other, though it is not always easy to draw an undoubted line between them. 1st, to scold, to quarrel, to bicker—Bailey, and 2nd, as Fr. brandiller, to brandle or brandish. The It. brandolare is explained by Florio, to brangle, to shake, to shog, to totter.

The tre brangillis, hoisting to the fall, With top trimbling, and branchis shaiand all. D. V. 59. 50.

In this application the word seems direct from the Fr. branler, the spelling with ng (instead of the nd in brandle) being an attempt to represent the nasal sound of the Fr. n. In the same way the Fr. bransle, a round dance, became brangle or brawl in E. ; It. branla, a French brawl or brangle.—Fl.
From the sense of shaking probably arose that of throwing into disorder, put-ting to confusion.

Thus was this usurper's faction brangled, then bound up again, and afterward divided again by want of worth in Baliol their head.—Hume in Jam.
To embrangle, to confuse, perplex, con-found. The sense of a quarrel may be derived from the idea of confusion, or in that sense brangle may be a direct imita-tion of the noise of persons quarrelling, as a nasalised form of the Piedm. bragale, to vociferate, make an outcry.

Brase.—Braser.—Brasil. To brase meat is to pass it over hot coals; a braser, a pan of hot coals. It. bracea, bracia, bragia, Fr. braise. Port. braza, live coals, glowing embers; brazeiro, a pan of coals.
The word brésil, brasil, was in use before the discovery of America in the sense of a bright red dye, the colour of braise or hot coals, and the name of Brazil was given because a dyewood, supplying a more convenient source of the colour than hitherto known, was found there. ' A qual—agora se chama do Brasil por caso do pao vermilho que della vem :' ' which at present is called Brasil on account of the red wood which comes from thence.—De Goes, Chron. de Don Emanuel in Marsh. The name of Santa Cruz having been originally given to the country, De Barros considers it an eminent triumph of the devil that the name of that holy wood should have been superseded by the name of a wood used in dyeing cloths.
In the Catalonian tariffs of the 13th century the word is very common in the forms brasil, brazil, bresil.

La ai-jou molt garance et waide Et bresil et alun et graine Dont jou gaaing mes dras et laine. Michel. Chron. du Roi Guill. d'Angl. in Marsh.

Diez seems to put the cart before the horse in deriving the word from ON. brasa, to braze or lute, to solder iron. It is more likely derived from the roaring sound of flame. G. brausen, prasseln, to roar, to crackle; AS. brastlian, to brustle, crackle, burn.—Lye. Sw. brasca, faire fracas, to make display; Milan. brascat, to kindle, set on fire.—Diez. Gris. brasca, sparks. Sw. brasa, to blaze, also as a noun, a roaring fire. Fr. embraser, to set on fire; Wallon. bruzi, braise, hot ashes; Pied. brusé. It. bruciare, Fr. brusler, brûler, to burn. E. brustle, to crackle, to make a noise like straw or small wood in burning, to rustle.—Halli-well. Fr. bruire, to murmur, make a noise, and bruir, brouir, to burn.—

Roquefort. 'E tut son corps arder et bruir.'—Rayn.
Brass.—Bronze. AS. bræs, from being used in the brazing or soldering of iron. ON. bras, solder, especially that used in the working of iron; at brasa, ferruminare, to solder. The verb is probably derived from the braise, or glowing coals over which the soldering is done; Fr. braser l'argent, le repasser un peu sur la braise.—Cot. The same correspondence is seen between It. bronzo, burning coals, bronzacchiare, to carbonado, as rashers upon quick burning coals, bronzare, to braze, to copper, and bronzo, brass, pan-metal.—Florio.
Brat. A rag, a contemptuous name for a young child.—Bailey. AS. brat, a cloak, a clout. W. brat, a rag. Gael. brat, a mantle, apron, cloth; bratach, a banner. A brat is commonly used for a child's pinafore in many parts of England. P1.D. slakker-börtchen, a slabbering-bib. For the application to a child compare Bret. trul, pil, a rag; trulen or pilen (in the feminine form), a contemptuous name for a woman, a slut. So also Lap. slibro, a rag; neita slibro (neita, girl), a little girl.
Brattice.—Bartizan. A brattice is a fence of boards in a mine or round dangerous machinery, from Sc. bred, G. brett, Du. berd, a plank or board, as lattice, a frame of laths, from Fr. latte, a lath.
A bretise or bretage is then a parapet, in the first instance of boards, and in a latinised shape it is applied to any boarded structure of defence, a wooden tower, a parapet, a testudo or temporary roof to cover an attack, &c. Sc. brettys, a fortification.—Jam. Betrax of a walle (bretasce, bretays), propugnaculum.—Pr. Pm. It. bertesca, baltresca, a kind of rampart or fence of war made upon towers; a block-house.—Altieri. Fr. breteque, bretesque, bretesche, a portal of defence in the rampire of a town.—Cot. Duæ testudines quas Gallicæ trutesches appellant.—Math. Paris. A.D. 1224. Circumeunt civitatem castellis et turribus ligneis et berteschiis. Hist. Pisana in Mur. A.D. 1156.
A wooden defence of the foregoing description round the deck of a ship, or on the top of a wall, was called by the Norsemen vig-gyrdill, a battle-girdle. 'Med endilongum bænom var umbuiz á husum uppi, reistr upp bord-viðr á utanverðom þaukom sva sem viggyrðlat væri.' Along the town things were prepared up on the houses, boarding being raised up out on the roofs like the battle rampire on board a ship.—Sverris Saga, 275.
Then as parapets and battlements naturally took the shape of projections on the top of a building, the term bretesche was applied to projecting turrets or the like beyond the face of the wall. Un possesseur d'un heritage—ne peut faire bretesques, boutures, saillies, ni autres choses sur la rue au prejudice de ses voisins.—Duc.
Now this is precisely the ordinary sense of the E. bartisan; ' the small overhanging turrets which project from the angles or the parapet on the top of a tower.'—Hal.
That the town colours be put upon the bertisene of the steeple.—Jam.
The word is also used in the sense of a fence of stone or wood. Jam. Sup. It may accordingly be explained as a corruption of bratticing, brettysing, bartising, equivalent to the Du. borderinge, coassatio, contignatio.—Kil.
Brave. See Brag.
Brawl. 1. A kind of dance. Fr. bransle, branle, from branler, to shake. See Brandish, Brangle.
2. A dispute or squabble. Certainly from the confused noise, whether contracted from brabble, as scrawl from scrabble, or whether it be from Fr. brailler, frequentative of braire, to cry, as criailler of crier. Swiss bradle, deblaterare, bradlete, strepitus linguarum. — Deutsch. Mundart. 2. 368. Dan. bralle, to talk much and high; at bralle op, to scold and make a disturbance; vraale, to bawl, squall, roar. Gael. braodhlach, brawling, noise, discord; braoilich, a loud noise. The term brawl is also applied to the noise of broken water, as a brawling brook. See Bray.
Brawn. The muscular part of the body. It. brano, brandillo, brandone, any piece, cob, luncheon, or collop of flesh violently pulled away from the whole.—Fl. OHG. bráto (acc. bratán), Fris. braede, braeye, a lump of flesh, flesh of a leg of pork, calf of the leg.—Diez. Kil. Prov. bradon, brazon, braon, OFr. braion, Lorraine bravon, a lump of flesh, the buttocks, muscular parts of the body; Wall. breyon, a lump, breyon d'chaur, bribe de viande, bas morceau de viande fraiche, breyon de gambes, the calf of the leg.—Remacle. Westphal. bran, Cologne broden, calf of the leg, buttock; Sc. brand calf of the leg; Sp. brahon for bradon, a patch of cloth. OFr. esbraonier. It. sbranare, to tear piecemeal. See Brand.
To Bray.—Braid. Many kinds of loud harsh noise are represented by the syllable bra, bru, with or without a final d, g, k, ch, y.
Fr. braire, to bray like an ass, bawl, yell, or cry out loudly; bruire, to rumble, rustle, crash, to sound very loud and very harshly; brugier, to bellow, yell, roar, and make a hideous noise.—Cot. Prov. bruzir, to roar or bellow.
Gr. βράχω, to crash, roar, rattle, resound; βρύχω, to roar. ON. brak, crash, noise; vapna-brak, the clash of arms; Dan. brage, to crash, crackle; E. bray, applied to loud harsh noises of many kinds, as the voice of the ass, the sound of arms, &c. Heard ye the din of battle bray?
With a terminal d we have Prov. braidir, braidar, to cry; Port. bradar, to cry out, to bawl, to roar as the sea. OE. to braid, abraid, upbraid, to cry out, make a disturbance, to scold.
Quoth Beryn to the serjauntes, That ye me hondith so Or what have I offendit, or what have I seide? Trewlich quoth the serjauntis it vaylith not to breide (there is no use crying out) With us ye must awhile whether ye woll or no.—Chaucer.
Then as things done on a sudden or with violence are accompanied by noise, we find the verb to bray or braid used to express any kind of sudden or violent action, to rush, to start, to snatch.
Ane blusterand bub out fra the North braying Gan o'er the foreschip in the baksail ding.—D. V. Syne stilckis dry to kyndill there about laid is, Quhill all in inflame the bleis of fyre upbradis.—D. V. i. e. starts crackling up.
The cup was uncoverid, the sword was out ybrayid.—Beryn.
A forgyt knyff but baid he bradis out.—Wal-lace IX. 145.
But when as I did out of slepe abray.—F. Q.
The miller is a per'lous man he seide And if that he out of his slepe abreide He might don us both a villany.—Chaucer.
The ON. bragd is explained motus quilibet celerior; at bragdi, instantaneously, at once, as OE. at a braid.
His bow he hadden taken right And at a braid he gun it bende.—R. R.
ON. augnabragd, a wink, twinkling of the eye. Then, as the notion of turning is often connected with swiftness of motion, to braid acquires the sense of bend, turn, twist, plait.
And with a braid I tumyt me about.—Dunbar in Jam.

On syde he bradis for to eschew the dint.—D. V. in Jam.
ON. bregda, to braid the hair, weave nets, &c. The ON. bragd is also applied to the gestures by which an individual is characterised, and hence also to the lineaments of his countenance, explaining a very obscure application of the E. braid. Braid, appearance—Bailey; to braid, to pretend, to resemble.—Hal.
To pretend is to assume the appearance and manners of another. 'Ye braid of the miller's dog,' you have the manners of the miller's dog. To braid of one's father, to have the lineaments of one's father, to resemble him. ON. bragr, gestus, mos; at braga eftir einum, to imitate or resemble one. N. braa, kind, soft; braa, to resemble.
On the same principle may be explained a passage of Shakespeare, which has given much trouble to commentators.
Since Frenchmen are so braid. Marry who will, I'll live and die a maid.
The meaning is simply, 'since such are the manners of Frenchmen, &c.'
To Bray. 2. To rub or grind down in a mortar. Sp. bregar, to work up paste or dough, to knead; Prov. Cat. bregar, to rub; Fr. broyer, Bret. braea, to bray in a mortar. W. breuan, a mill, a brake for hemp or flax. See Brake.
Breach. AS. brice, Fr. breche, a breach or brack in a wall, &c.—Cot. From the verb to break.
Bread. ON. brauð. G. brot.
To Break. Goth. brikan, brak, G. brechen, Lat. frangere, fractus; Gr. ῥήγνυμι, to break, ῥάκος, a rag; Fin. rikkoa, to break, to tear; Bret. regi, rogi, to break, to tear; rog, a rent.
The origin is doubtless a representation of the noise made by a hard thing breaking. In like manner the word crack is used both to represent the noise of a fracture, and to signify the fracture itself, or the permanent effects of it. The same relation is seen between Lat. fragor, a loud noise, and frangere, to break; Fr. fracas, a crash, disturbance, and fracasser, to break. The Lat. crepo and E. crash are used to signify both the noise made in breaking and the fracture itself.
The Swiss has bratschen, to smack or crack, bratsche, a brack, breach, or wound.
Bream. A broad-shaped fresh-water fish, cyprinus latus. Fr. brame, Du. braessem. Swiss bratschig, ill-favouredly broad.

Breast, as. breost, Goth. brusts, Du. borst. Perhaps the original meaning may be a chest. Prov. brut, bruc, brusc, the bust, body; brostia, brustia, a box.
Breath, as. bræth, an odour, scent, breath. Originally probably the word signified steam, vapour, as the G. brodem, brodel, broden.

The caller wine in cave is sought Mens broiling hoxes to cule.—Hume in Jam.
See Broth.
Breeches. Lat. braca, braceæ; Bret. bragez; ON. brok, brækur; It. brache; Prov. braga, braia; OFr. bragues, braies. The origin is the root brak in the sense of straining, binding, fastening; the original breeches being (as it must be supposed) a bandage wrapped round the hips, and brought beneath between the legs. Hence the Lat. subligar, subligaculum, from ligare, to bind. Piedm. braga, braca, a cramp-iron for holding things together, a horse's twitch; Fr. braie, braies, a twitch for a horse, bandage or truss for a rupture, clout for a child, drawers. Bracha, a girdle.—Gl. Isidore and Tatian.
The Breech (Prov. braguier, braie) may be explained as the part covered by the breeches, but more probably the E. term designates the part on which a boy is breeched or flogged, a word formed from the sound of a loud smack. Swiss brätsch, a smack, the sound of a blow with the flat hand, or the blow itself; brätschen, to smack; bratscher, an instrument for smacking, a fly-flap, &c. G. dial. (Westerwald) pritschen, britschen, to lay one on a bench and strike him with a flat board; Du. bridsen, de bridse geven, met de bridse slaan, xyligogio castigare.—Biglotton. Pl.D. britze, an instrument of laths for smacking on the breech; einem de britze geven, to strike one on the breech so that it smacks (klatschet).
In like manner it is not improbable that Fr. fesses, the breech or buttocks, instead of being derived from Lat. fissus, cloven, as commonly explained, may be from the verb fesser, to breech, to scourge on the buttocks (Cot.), corresponding to G. fitzen, peitschen, and E. to feize or feaze, to whip, forms analogous to E. switch, representing the sound of a blow.
Breeze. Fr. brise, a cool wind. It. brezza, chillness or shivering, a cold and windy mist or frost; brezzare, to be misty and cold, windy withal, also to chill and shiver with cold.

The origin is the imitation of a rustling noise, as by the Sc. brissle, properly to crackle, then to broil, to fry; Swiss Rom. brire, to rattle (as hail), simmer, murmur—Vocab. de Vaud.; brisoler, bresoler, to roast, to fry; L'os qui bresole, the singing bone.—Gl. Génév. Then from a simmering, twittering sound the term is applied to shivering, trembling, as in the case of twitter, which signifies in the first instance a continuous broken sound, and is then used in the sense of trembling. We have thus It. brisciare, brezzare, to shiver for cold. Compare OE. grill, chilly, with It. grillare, to simmer, Fr. griller, to crackle, broil, Du. grillen, to shiver.—Halma.
Breeze.—Briss.—Brist. The ashes and cinders sold by the London dustmen for brickmaking are known by the name of breeze. In other parts of England the term briss or brist is in use for dust, rubbish. Briss and buttons, sheep's droppings; bruss, the dry spines of furze broken off.—Dev. Gl. Piedm. brossé, orts, the offal of hay and straw in feeding cattle; Sp. broza, remains of leaves, bark of trees, and other rubbish; Fr. bris, débris, rubbish; bris de charbon, coal-dust; bresilles, bretilles, little bits of wood—Berri; briser, to break, burst, crush, bruise; Bret. bruzun, a crumb, morsel; G. brosame, a crumb; Du. brijsen, brijselen, to bray, to crush; Gael. bris, brisd, brist, to break; Dan. briste, to burst, break, fail. See Brick, Bruise.
Breeze.—Brize. G. breme, bremse, AS. brimsa, briosa, a gadfly, from the buzzing or bizzing (as it is pronounced in the N. of E.) sound with which the gadfly heralds his attack.
A fierce loud buzzing breeze, their stings draw blood, And drive the cattle gadding through the wood.
Dryden.
As AS. brimsa, G. bremse, point to G. brummen, Fris. brimme, to hum, so AS. briosa, E. breeze, are related to Prov. bruzir, to murmur, to resound, Swiss Rom. brison, breson, noise, murmur, Russ. briosat', to buzz.
To Brew. The origin of the word is shown by the Mid.Lat. forms, brasiare, braciare, braxare, Fr. brasser, to brew, from brace, brasium, OFr. bras, braux, breiz, Gael. braich, w. brag, sprouted corn, malt. So ON. brugga, Sw. brygga, to brew, from AS. brig, malt; ' brig, polenta.'—Gl. AS. in Schilter.
The Teutonic verbs, G. brauen, Du. brouwen, E. brew, are in like manner from a form similar to Wall. bra, brau, Walach. brah, malt.
If the foregoing were not so clear, a satisfactory origin might have been found in W. berwi, to boil, the equivalent of Lat. fervere, whence berw, berwedd, a boiling, and berweddu, to brew. Gael. bruith, to boil, and ODu. brieden, to brew.—Kil.
It is remarkable that the Gr. βράζω, βράσσω, to boil, would correspond in like manner to the Fr. brasser, which however is undoubtedly from brace, malt.
Brewis. See Broth.
Bribe. Fr. bribe de pain, a lump of bread; briber, to beg one's bread, collect bits of food. Hence OE. bribour, a beggar, a rogue; It. birbante, birbone, a cheat, a rogue, with transposition of the r.
A bribe is now only used in the metaphorical sense of a sop to stop the mouth of some one, a gift for the purpose of obtaining an undue compliance.
The origin of the word is the W. briwo, to break; briw, broken, a fragment; bara briw, broken bread. Rouchi brife, a lump of bread.—Hécart.
Brick. A piece of burnt clay.—Thomson. The radical meaning is simply a bit, a fragment, being one of the numerous words derived from break. Lang. brico, or brizo, a crum; bricou, a little bit; bricounejha, to break to pieces; bricalio, a crum, little bit, corresponding to OE. brocaly, broken victuals. AS. brice, fracture, fragment, hlafes brice, a bit of bread. In some parts of France brique is still used in this sense, brique de pain, a lump of bread.—Diez. Brique, fragment of anything broken.—Gl. Génév. Bricoteau, a quoit of stone.—Cot. It. briccia, any jot or crum, a collop or slice of something.—Fl.
Bride.—Bridal. Goth. bruths, daughter-in-law; OHG. brût, sponsa, conjux, nurus; G. braut, bride. W. priod, appropriate, fit, appropriated, owned; also married, a married man or woman; priodas, a wedding; priod-fab, a bridegroom (mab=son); priod-ferch, a bride (merch=maid). Priodi, to appropriate; priodor, a proprietor. Diefenbach compares Lat. privus, one's own, privatus, appropriate, peculiar.
Bridegroom, AS. bryd-guma, the newly-married man; guma, a man. Bridal, for bride-ale, AS. bryd-eale, the marriage feast, then the marriage itself. So in OSw. fastningar-öl, graf-öl, arf-öl, the feast of espousals, of burial, of succession to the dead; from the last of which, E. dial. arval, funeral.
Bridge.—AS. bricge; G. brücke; OSw. bro, brygga, as so, sugga, a sow, bo, bygga, to prepare, gno, gnugga, to rub. The Sw. bro is applied not only to a bridge, but to a paved road, beaten way; Dan. bro, bridge, pier, jetty, pavement; brolegge, to pave. 'Han lät broa twa rastin af Tiwede,' he made two leagues of road through the forest of Tiwede.—Ihre. At Hamburg a paviour is called steen-brygger. Pol. bruk, pavement; Lith. brukkas, pavement, stone-bridge; brukoti, to pave; brukkti, to press; ibrukkti, to press in, imprint. The original sense thus seems to be to ram, to stamp.
Bridle. AS. bridel; OHG. brittil, pritil; Fr. bride. Perhaps this may be one of the cases in which the derivation of the word has been obscured by the insertion of an r. ON. bitill, Dan. bidsel, a bridle, from bit, the part which the horse bites or holds in his mouth.
So It. bretonica, betonica, betony; brulicame, bulicame, boiling up; brocoliere, E. buckler; ON. bruskr and buskr, a bush; Du. broosekens, E. buskins; E. groom, AS. guma.
Brief. From Lat. breve or brevis, a summary or any short writing. Applied especially to a letter or command, to the king's writs. In the G. brief it has been appropriated to the sense of an epistle or letter. In E. it is applied to the letter of the Archbishop or similar official authorising a collection for any purpose; to the summary of instructions given to a barrister for the defence of his client.
Dictante legationis suae brevem.—Ducange.
Brier. AS. brær, brere, but probably from the Normans. In the patois of Normandy the word briere is still preserved (Patois de Bray). Fr. bruyere, a heath, from Bret. brug, bruk, W. grug, Gael. fraoch, Grisons bruch, brüg, heath. It. brughiera, a heath; brughera, thick brakes of high-grown ferns.—Flor. Mid. Lat. bruarium, a heath, barren land rough with brambles and bushes.—Duc.
Brig. A two-masted vessel. Probably contracted from brigantine. Sp. bergantino, a brig or brigantine, two-masted vessel.—Neumann.
Brigade. A division of an army, from Fr. brigade, and that from It. brigata, a company, troop, crew, brood. Trovar-si in brigata, to meet together.
The Prov. has briguer, in the sense of Fr. frayer, to circulate, consort with.
'Mes se a seivir als valens homes e a brignar ab lor.' He set himself to serve men of merit, and to associate with them. The primary meaning of Sp. bregar, It. brigare, seems to be to exert force ; bre-gar el arco, to bend a bow ; It. brigare, to strive for, to shift for with care, labour, and diligence, briga, necessary business.—Florio. Brigata, then, would be a set of people engaged in a common occupa-tion.
Brigand.—Brigantine.—Brigan-dine. It. briga, strife, Mid.Lat. briga, jurgia, rixa, pugna.—Duc. It. brigare, to strive, brawl, combat. Probably then it was in the sense of skirmishers that the name of brigand was given to certain light-armed foot-soldiers, frequently men-tioned by Froissart and his contempora-ries. A Latin glossary quoted by Du-cange has 'Veles, brigant, c'est une manière de gens d'armes courant et apert à pié.' ' Cum 4 millibus peditum arma-torum, duobus millibus brigantum et ducentis equitibus.'—Chron. A.D. 1351, in Duc. They were also called brigancii or brigantini. ' Briganciis et balestra-riis Anglicis custodiam castri muniendi reservavit.' The passage from the sense of a light-armed soldier to that of a man pillaging on his own account, is easily understood. In the time of the bataile (of Agincourt) the brigantis of the Frensch took the kyngis car-riage and led it away.—Capgrave, 312. It. brigante, a pirate, rover either by sea or land.—Flor. A similar change has taken place in the meaning of the It. malandrini, in later times a robber or highway-man, but classed by Thomas of Walsingham with the Brigands as a species of horse-soldier. Reductus est ergo et coram consilio demon-stratus Brigantinorum more semivestitus gestans sagittas breves qualiter utuntur equites illarum partium qui Malandrini dicuntur.—Duc. From brigante, in the sense of a rob-ber. It. brigandare, to rob, to rove, to play the pirate or thief at sea, and hence a brigantine, a small light pinnace pro-per for giving chase or fighting—Bailey ; a vessel employed for the purpose of piracy. A brigandine was a kind of scale armour, also called briganders, from being worn by the light troops called Brigands. A Breton glossary quoted by Ducange has ' Brigandinou, Gall. brigan-dine, Lat. squamma ; inde squammatus, orné de brigandine.' The sense of strife or combat express-ed by briga is a particular case of the general notion of exertion of force. See Brake. In the same way to strive is, in the first instance, to exert one's force in the attempt to do something, and, second-arily, to contend with another.
Bright.—Brilliant. Goth. bairhts, clear, manifest ; ON. biartr, AS. beorht, bright ; bearhtm, bræhtin, bryhtm, a glit-tering, twinkling, moment. Bav. bracht, clang, sound, noise.—Schmeller. OHG. praht, pracht, clear sound, outcry, tumult, and, at a later period, splendour. The E. bright itself was formerly applied to sounds.
Heo-song so schille and so brihte That far and ner me hit iherde.— Owl and Nightingale, 1654. AS. beorhtian, strepere. — Beowulf, 2315. Leod wæs asungen Gleomannes gyd, Gamen æft æstah Beorhtode benc sweg. The lay was sung, the gleeman's song, the sport grew high, the bench-notes resounded. In like manner the G. prahlen signifies in the first instance to speak with a loud voice, to cry, and secondly, to glitter, to shine.—Adelung. The origin of both these words is the imitative root brag, brak, representing a sudden noise. Swab. bragen, brægen, briegen, to cry—Schmid ; OE. bray, braid. The phenomena from whence all repre-sentative words are immediately taken must of course belong to the class which addresses itself to the ear, and we find accordingly that the words expressing attributes of light are commonly derived from those of sound. So G. hell, clear, transparent, from hall, a sound, clangour. The Ir. glôr, a noise, voice, speech, glôram, to sound, show the origin of Lat. clarus, clear, with respect either to sound or colour, and the E. tinkle, that of Fr. etincelle, a spark. From ON. glamm, glamr, tinnitus, glamra, to resound, may be explained glampi, glitter, splendour, glampa, to shine, corresponding to the Gr. λάμπω, λαμπρός. Du. schateren, scheteren, to make a loud noise, to shriek with laughter, schiteren, to shine, to glisten. In Fin. there are many examples of the same transfer of sig-nification from the phenomena of the one sense to those of the other; kiï'a, clare tinniens, clare lucens, splendens ; kilistua, tinnitum clarum moveo, splen-dorem clarum reflecto. Wilistâ, to ring, as glass ; willata, wilella, tuilahtaa, flash, to glitter; kajata, to resound, re-echo, also to reflect, shine, appear at a distance; kimista, to sound clear (equiva-lent to the E. chime), kimina, sonus acutus, clangor tinniens, kimmaltaa, kiimottaa, to shine, to glitter; kommata, komista, to sound deep or hollow; komottaa, to shine, to shimmer.
In like manner in Galla the sound of a bell is imitated by the word bilbil, whence bilbil-goda (literally, to make bilbil), to ring, to glitter, beam, glisten.—Tutschek.
The meaning of the Fr. briller, to shine, seems to have been attained on a principle exactly similar. We must pre-mise that an initial br and gr, as well as bl and gl, frequently interchange, as in Langued. brezil, Fr. grézil, small gravel, It. brullo, grullo, parched, broiled.—Flor.
We have then in Fr. the verbs grisser, to creak, crackle; gresiller, gris-ler, to make a crackling noise, as of meat in broiling; griller, to creak, crackle, broil; and corresponding to these, with an initial br instead of gr, Sc. brissle, Swiss Rom. brisoler, bresoler (Gloss. Génév.), to broil, to parch, identical with the Fr. breziller, briller, to twinkle, glit-ter, sparkle.
Here it cannot be doubted that the original meaning of the Sc. brissle was derived from the crackling noise made by meat in broiling, as in AS. brastlian, to crackle, to burn. In Fr. breziller, briller (related to each other as gresiller, griller), the meaning is trans-ferred from the domain of the ear to that of the eye, from the analogous effect pro-duced on the sensitive frame by a crack-ling noise and a sparkling light. So Fr. pétiller, to crackle, to sparkle, to shake, to long for a thing.
The verb briller itself seems to have the sense of shaking or trembling in the expression briller après, greedily to covet—Cot.; properly to tremble with impa-tience.
Instead of briller in this application the Swiss Rom. uses bresoler (il bresole d'être marié; os qui bresole, the singing bone), strongly confirming the contraction of briller from breziller, and the cor-respondence of the pair with griller, gre-siller; griller d'impatience.—Dict. Tre-voux.
It. brillare, to quaver with the voice.—Fl.
Brim.—Rim. g. brame, brame, Lith. bremas, border, margin, edge; Pol. bram, border, brim; Magy. perem, prem, a bor-der, fringe (Lat. fimbria); Du. breme, bremel, a border, lap, fringe; ON. barmr, the edge, border, lip of a vessel, lap of a garment; hence the bosom, originally the lap folding over the breast. E. barm, the lap or bosom; barm-cloth or barm-skin, an apron.
The E. ryme, which seems identical with rim, is used for the surface of the sea (Hawkins' Voyage). In the same way Sw. bryn is used in the sense both of border or edge and surface, vattu-bryn, the ryme of the water; ögne-bryn, the eye-brow. Dan. bryn, brow of a hill, surface of the ocean.
To Brim. Said of swine when in heat. 'Subo, to brymme as a boore doth whan he geteth pigges.'—Elyot in Way.
The expression is now confined to the sow, as is the case also with Pl.D. brum-men: de söge brummet, the sow is brim-ming.—Brem. Wtb. G. brumft, brunft, the heat of animals.
Closely connected is OE. breme, brim, fierce, furious, vigor-ous.—Hal.
Tancred went his way and Richard wex full brim. Langtoft, 154.
The highest condition of ungratified passion, whether of desire or anger, finds its vent in cries and roaring. Thus Lat. fremo, to roar, is used of raging, excited, or violent action. It. bramire, to roar as a lion, bray as an ass; bramire, a long-ing or earnest desire; bramare, earnestly to wish or covet.—Fl.
Prov. bramar, OFr. bramer, to utter cries.
L'amour, que époinçonne Toute creature a s'aimer, Les fait de rut si fort bramer Que le bois d'autour en resonne.—Rayn.
Sp. bramar, to roar, to storm, to fret; brama, rut, the heat of animals. Du. bremmen, rugire, sonitum edere; bremen, ardere desiderio.—Kil.
Rugere, rugire (cervorum, leonum), brommen, bremmen, brimmen, brummen.—Dief. Supp.
Brimstone. ON. brennistein, Sw. dial. brännsten, burning stone. In Ge-nesis and Exodus, l. 754, we have brim-fir, and l. 1164, brinfire, for the burning of Sodom: 'the brinfire's stinken smoke.' AS. bryne, burning. ON. (poet.) brimi, fire.
Brindled.—Brinded. Streaked, co-loured in stripes. ON. bröndottr, s. s.; brand-krossottr, cross-barred in colour, from brandr, a stick, post, bar. A brindled cow is in Normandy called vache brangde, from bringe, a rod. Hence with an initial s, Sc. spraing, a streak, sprainged, striped or streaked.
The identity of ON. brandr and Fr.

bringe is traced through the It. brano, brandello, a bit; Fr. brin, a morsel, a slip or sprig of an herb; Berri, bringue, a crum, a morsel; bringe, a rod or twig, brindelles de balai, the twigs of a besom. See Brand.
Brine. AS. bryne, Du. brijn (Kil.), Sc. brim, brime. Liquamen vel garum, fisc-bryne.—Gl. Alfr. Brym, brim (poet.), the sea; brymflod, a deluge. In Dorset sea sand is called brimsand.—Hal. Salte water, saulmeure, or bryme.—Palsgr. The name seems to be taken from the roaring of the waves; ON. brim, the surf, breaking of the waves; brim sior, a stormy sea; brimhliod, roar of the sea; brim-saltr, very salt; brimi, flame. Gr. βρέμω, Fris. brimme, to roar. See To Brim. Da. brænding, the surf, from brænde, to burn, can only come from comparison of the noise of the breakers to the roar of flames.
Brisk. Fr. brusque, lively, quick, rash, fierce, rude, harsh; vin brusque, wine of a sharp, smart taste. It. brusco, eager, sharp, brisk in taste, as unripe fruits, sour, grim, crabbed.
Brisket. Fr. brichet, the brisket or breast-piece of meat; Norm. bruchet, Adam's apple in a man's throat, breast-bone of birds; Bret. bruched (Fr. ch) the breast, chest, craw of a bird. ' Pectus-culum, bruskett.'—Nat. Antiq. p. 222. Russ. briocho, Bohem. brich, bricho (with the diminutives, Russ. brioshko, Boh. brissko), a belly.
Bristle. AS. byrst; Sw. borst, Du. borstel, Sc. birs, birse, NE. brust. A thick elastic hair, strong enough to stand up of itself. Corn. bros, aculeus.—Zeuss. Walach. borzos (struppig), bristly; Swiss borzen, to stand out; Fr. à rebours, against the grain; rebrousser, to turn up the point of anything.—Cot. Mid.Lat. reburrus, rebursus, sticking up; 'In sua primæva ætate habebat capillos crispos et rigidos et ut ita dicam rebursos ad modum pini ramorum qui semper tendunt sursum.'—Vita abbatum S. Crispini in Duc.
The It. brisciare, brezzare, to shiver for cold as in a fit of an ague, has under Breeze been connected with the Sc. brissle, birsle, birstle, to broil, to scorch, originally merely to crackle or simmer. Hence ribrezzare, to shiver for cold or for fear, to astonish or affright with sudden fear; ribrezzoso, startling, trembling, full of astonishment, humorous, fantastical, suddenly angry.
Then as the effect of shivering, or the emotions which produce it, is to erect the hair, to birstle, brissle might properly be used in the sense of startling, ruffling, setting the hair on end, whence may be explained the Sc. expression, to set up one's birse, to put one in a rage; birssy, hot-tempered, to be compared with the It. ribrezzoso, angry. A cold bleak day is called a birssy day, because it makes us shivery and goose-skinned, setting the hair on end; compare It. brezza, a cold and windy mist or frost.
Brittle.—Brickle. Formerly written brotil, apt to break, from AS. brytan, ON. briota, Ptg. britar, to break. Dan. bryde, to break, brodden, brittle. In the N. of E. and Sc. brickle, brockle, bruckle, are used in the sense of brittle, from break. The Pl.D. bros, brittle, is the equivalent derivative from the Gael. form bris, Fr. briser. Bret. bresk, brusk, fragile.
Broach.—Abroach.—Brooch. To broach a cask is to pierce it for the purpose of drawing off the liquor, and hence, metaphorically, to broach a business, to begin upon it, to set it a going. W. procio, to thrust, to stab; Gael. brog, to goad, to spur, and, as a noun, an awl. Prov. broca, Fr. broche, a spit, a stitch; brocher, to spit, stitch, spur; Prov. brocar. It. broccare, brocciare, to stick, to spur. Sp. broca, a brad or tack, a button; broche, a clasp, a brooch, i. e. an ornamented pin to hold the parts of dress together. Lat. brocchus, bronchus, a projecting tooth; It. brocco, a stump or dry branch of a tree so that it prick a bud, a peg; sbrocco, sprocco, a skewer, sprout, shoot. It is probable that there is a fundamental connection with the verb to break, the notion of a sharp point being obtained either from the image of a broken stick (brocco, stecco rotto in modo che punga—Altieri), or from that of a splinter or small fragment, which in the case of wood or similar material naturally takes the form of a prick, or finally from the pointed form of a bud or shoot, breaking out into growth. It. brocco, a bud, broccoli, sprouts. Compare also E. prick with Sw. spricka, to crack, to shoot, to bud. A similar relation may be observed between Sp. brote, a bud, a fragment, Prov. brot, a shoot or sprig, and forms like the ON. briota. Port. britar, to break.
Broad. AS. brád; Goth. braids; ON. breidr; G. breit. See Spread.
Brocade. It. broccata, a sort of cloth wrought with gold and silver. Commonly explained as from Fr. brocher, to stitch, in the sense of embroidered. But Muratori shows that, though from the same fundamental origin, the line of development has been something different. It. brocco, a peg, stump, or snag, is also applied to a knot or bunch in silk or thread, whence broccare, to boss, to stud—Fl.; broccoso, broccuto, knotty, knobby; and broccato was used to signify stuff ornamented with a raised pile, forming knots or loops, or stuff embossed with gold and silver. Ptg. froco, a flock or little tuft of silk or wool, a flake of snow; frocadura, tufted ornaments, embroidery.
Brock. A badger, from the white-streaked face of the animal. Gael. broice, a mole, a freckle, brucach, spotted, freckled; breac, speckled, piebald; broc, a badger; brocach, Sc. broukit, brooked, streaked or speckled in the face. Dan. broged, parti-coloured, broc, a badger. W. brech, brych, brindled, freckled, brychau, motes, spots, atoms; Bret. brich, briz, speckled, parti-coloured, streaked, brizen, a freckle. For the same reason the badger is also called Bawson, q. v.
Brocket. A hart of two years old. Fr. brocart, because the animal at that age has a single sharp broche or snag to his antler. The fallow-deer of the same age was termed a pricket.—Cot.
To Broider. Fr. broder, Sp. bordar, to ornament with needle-work. Here two distinct images seem to have coalesced in a common signification. The Bret. brouda, to embroider, to prick, to spur, and W. brodio, to embroider, to darn, point to an origin in Bret. broud, a prick, sting, Gael. brod, E. brod, prod, to prick. On the other hand the Sp. bordar seems derived from borde, bordo, a border, because a border of needle-work was the earliest mode of ornamenting a garment. Ihre has gull-bord, a border ornamented with gold, silkes-borda, a border ornamented with silk. So from Pol. bram, a border, bramowanie, embroidering.
It may happen here, as will often be found to be the case in other instances where the derivation seems to halt between two roots, that these are themselves modifications of a common original. Thus brod, a point, and bord or bred, an edge, agree in being the extremity of a thing. The ON. brydda is both to sharpen or furnish with a point, and also to sew on a border or fringe to a garment. Compare also AS. brerd, breard, a brim, rim, margin, with Sc. braird, the shoot of corn, AS. onbryrdan, to instigate.

Broil. Disturbance, trouble, a falling-out, a quarrel.—B. The sense has been somewhat modified in later times by a confusion with brawl.
But that thou wilt in winter ships prepare And trie the seas in broile of whirling windes. Surrey in R.
The proper sense is that of Fr. brouiller (from whence it immediately comes), to jumble, trouble, shuffle, confound, to make a hurly-burly.—Cot. It. broglio. Gael. broighlich, noise, bawling, confusion, tumult; broighleach, bustling, noisy, tumultuous. From a direct imitation of a confused sound. Fr. brouhaha, brouhoux, storms, blusters, hurly-burlies. See Brawl.
To Broil. To roast upon hot coals.—B. Contracted from Fr. brasiller, to roast on the braise, or glowing coals; or perhaps we should rather say formed like Fr. brasiller, brusler, bruler, or It. brasciare, brasciuolare, brasolare, brusciare, brucilare, brusuolare (the last to be argued from brasciuole, brasuole, brusuole, fried or boiled steaks), brullare, to burn, parch, scorch, broil.—Florio. Sc. birsle, brissle, to parch or broil. In all these words the imitative character of the designation from the crackling sound of flame and burning grease is felt in a lively manner. Compare G. prasseln, to crackle, rustle, and AS. brastlian, to crackle, to burn, Grisons brascla, sparks; E. brustle, to crackle, make a noise like straw or small wood in burning.—Hal.
When he is falle in such a dreme— He routeth with a slepie noyse And broustleth as a monkes froyse (pancake) When it is throwe into the panne.—Gower in R. It. brustolare, to scorch, broil, carbonado. With an initial gr instead of br the Fr. has grisser, to crackle, creak, gresiller, to crackle as a shell in the fire, or salted fish on coals, grislement, a crackling noise as of meat in broiling; griller, to broil, precisely analogous to the Sc. brissle and E. broil. The Italian has the double form brullo, grullo, parched, broiled.—Fl.
Broker. The custom of employing a broker in the purchase of goods arises from the advantage of having a skilled intermediary, capable from long practice of forming a critical judgment of the goods in question, of pointing out their latent defects, and rejecting whatever falls below the degree of excellence called for by the circumstances of the case. To find fault is accordingly recognised in

Piers Plowman as the specific duty of a broker:— Among burgeises have I be Dwellyng at London, And gart Backbiting be a brocour, To blame mens ware.

On this principle the G. designation is mäkler, from makel, a blur, stain, fault; makeln, to criticise, censure, find fault with, [and thence] to follow the business of a broker, buy and sell by commission.—Küttner. For the same reason the OFr. term was correctour, couratier, Lat. corrector, correctarius, whence the modern courtier, a broker. Per manus et mediationem quorundam J. S. et A. G. brocariorum et correctariorum ejusdem barganei.—Lib. Alb. 396. Vous jurrez que vous ne marchandirez dez nullez marchaundisez queux vous ferez correctage.—Sacramentum Abrocariorum in Lib. Alb. To correct an exercise is to point out the faults.

Now in most of the Teutonic (especially the Pl.D.) and Slavonic dialects is found the root brak or wrak in the sense of rejection, refuse, vile, damaged, faulty, giving rise to a verb signifying to inspect, make selection, sort, try out, reject, cast out. Lith. brokas, a fault, weak place, matter of blame; brokoti, to blame, to criticise (mäkeln). Russ. brak, refuse; brakovat, to pick and choose, to sort; brakovanie, inspection, rejection; Pol. brak, want, lack, refuse; brakowad, to garble, to pick, to be wanting. In the Teutonic class: Du. brack, rejected, damaged; braeck goed, goods damaged by sea-water.—Kil. Pl.D. braken, to garble, inspect, try; wraken, to pronounce unsound, to reject; Dan. vrage, to reject, find fault with, to sort goods; slaae vrag paa, to throw blame upon, find fault with. G. brack-gut (Sanders), Pl.D. wrack-good, refuse goods. Prov. brae, refuse, filth, mud, ordure, and as an adj. vile, dirty, abject. Fr. bric-a-brac, trumpery, brokers' goods. See Brackish.

The name broker seems to have come to us from the shores of the Baltic, with which much of our early commerce was carried on. In those countries the term braker, bracker, or wracker is used to signify public inspectors, appointed to classify goods according to their quality, and to reject the damaged and unsound.—Adelung. In Petersburgh the price of tallow is quoted with or without brack, the term brack signifying the official inspection of sworn brackers or sorters.—Tooke's Catherine, i. 38.

If we advance another step in the inquiry and seek the origin of the term brack, wrak, in the sense of rejection, we shall probably find the original image in the act of spitting, as the liveliest expression of disgust and contempt for the rejected object. G. brechen, Du. bracken, to vomit; E. dial. whnake, tussis, screatio—Junius; wreak, a cough—Hal.; ON. hraki, spittle; hrak, any refuse matter. Fr. raquer, racher, cracker, to spit; racaille, refuse; Prov. raca, an old worthless horse, analogous to Bohem. brakyne, an outcast or rejected sheep. The Langued. brumo, phlegm, spittle, has exactly the force of G. brack in the expression brumos de boutigo, merchandises de rebut; G. brack-gut, refuse wares. See Wreak.

In the sense of blot or stain there is a singular confusion with brack, a breach or flaw, from break.

Bronze. It. bronzo, Sp. bronce, pan metal.—Fl. This word shows the same relation to It. bronze, glowing coals, which E. brass does to Sp. brasa, embers. Bronzare, to braze, to copper. ON. brasa, to braze or solder iron with a lute of brass. It would appear then that the use of the metal in soldering, an operation performed over hot coals, is the origin of the designation both of bronze and brass. It may be compared with It. bronze, Sc. brunds, brands, embers; to brund, to emit sparks.—Jam. Grisons brinzla, brascla, a spark, sbrinzlar, to sparkle. The use of the word bronzed in the sense of tanned, sunburnt, is probably not originally derived from comparison with the colour of the metal bronze, but from the primary sense of the It. bronze, embers. Abbronzare, abbronzanchiare, to roast on the embers, to scorch, tan, or sunburn.—Fl.

Brood.—Breed, AS. brod, a brood; brid, the young of any animal; bredan, to nourish, cherish, keep warm. Du. broeden, to sit on eggs, to hatch; G. brut, the spawn of fishes, progeny of birds, insects, and fishes; brüten, to hatch, bring eggs and spawn into active life. Pl.D. brod, brot, fish-spawn; broden, broen, to hatch, bridde, a chicken. Commonly referred to the notion of warming, in which sense the OHG. bruoton is used by Notker: 'also unsih diu uuolla bruotet unde uuider froste skirmet,' as wool warms us and protects us against frost. Bret. broud, hot, burning, fermenting, w. brwd, hot, warm; brydio, to be hot. ODu. brieden, to brew. See Broth.

Brook. AS. broca, a brook; w. bruchen, the bubbling or springing up of water, a spring, a source; Gael. bruich, to boil, seethe, simmer; from the murmuring noise. Gr. βρυχω, to roar, βρυω, to spring; Bohem. bruceti, to murmur. The meaning of the word brook in the low G. dialects is very different, signifying low wet land (Brem. Wtb.); a grassy place in a heath.—Overyssel Almanack. It is possible that brook in the E. sense may be connected with Russ. breg, Gael. bruach, Manx broogh, brink, verge, bank, as Fr. rivière, a river, It. riviera, a shore, from ripa, bank.

To Brook. To digest, to bear patiently. AS. brucan, to use, eat, enjoy; Goth. brukjan, to use; bruks, useful; G. brauchen, to use. Lat. frui, fructus.

Broom. A shrub with leafless pointed branches. G. pfriemkraut, awl-plant. See Bramble.

Broth. It. brodo, Fr. brouet, broth; Du. broeye, brue; OHG. brod, G. brühe, Pl.D. broi, properly boiling water; brühen, broeien, to scald, pour boiling water over. Ir. bruithim, to boil; bruithe, sodden, boiled; bruithean, heat, warmth; bruth-chan, broth; brothaire, a caldron. Gael. bruich, bruith, to boil, brothas, broth; Manx broie, to boil, broit, broth. Bret. broud, w. brwd, hot. G. brodem, broden, steam from heated bodies, in which sense the Sc. broth is sometimes used; a person is said to be in a broth of sweat who is steaming with sweat. Du. broem (for brodem), spuma, sordes seu stigmatia rerum decoctarum. The origin is a representation of the simmering of boiling water. Limousin broudi, brudi, to make a confused noise of winds, waves, &c. Pl.D. bruddeln, to bubble up with noise. The softening down of the consonant (which is barely pronounced in Gael. brothas) gives the OE. browys, brewis, brewet, pottage, broth, and Sc. brost. The AS. has briw, infusion, ceales briw, kail brose, cabbage soup; Sc. broo, bree, pottage made by pouring boiling water on meal, infusion; the barley bree, juice of malt, ale; Gael. brigh, juice of meat, sap, pith, vigour, strength; Ir. bruth, strength, vigour, rage, heat; explaining the Prov. briu, and It. brio, mettle, spirit.

Brothel. Sp. borda, a hut or cottage; Fr. borde, a little house or cottage of timber, hut, hovel. — Cot. Commonly derived from the boards, of which the fabric consists. But the Walach. bordeiou is an underground hut as well as a house of ill fame.

The diminutive bordeau, bordel, was originally used in the innocent sense of a little cottage.
Ne laissent en Chartrain ne en Dive bordel, Ne maison en estant qui soit fors du chastel. Duc. Domunculum circuindedît cum familia. Sorengus vero expergefactus de bordello exiit et fugiens in vivariam exire voluit.—Duc.

Brother. A term widely spread through the branches of the Indo-Germanic stock. Sanscr. bhrâtr; Zend. brâta; Gael. brathair; w. brawd; Slavon. bratr; Lat. frater.

Brow. The ridge surrounding and protecting the eye. AS. braew, bregh; Pol. brew; Russ. brov, brow. Bohem. braubiti to border. Du. brauwe, eye-lid, eye-brow, and also border, margin, fur edging.—Kil. ON. brá, eye-lid, eye-lash; brún, eye-brow, edge, eminence; Dan. bryn, eye-brow, brow of a hill, surface of the ocean; Sw. bryn, edge, border, surface, w. bryn, a hill. G. Augen-braune, eye-brow. The AS. forms appear related to the Russ. breg, Bohem. breh, Gael. bruach, a brink, bank, shore; Serv. breg, a hill, bank, shore.

Brown. Ger. braun, ON. brun. It. bruno, Fr. brun, perhaps burnt colour, the colour of things burnt, from Goth. brinnan, G. brennen, to burn.

Browse. Fr. brouter, brouser, brouster, to knap or nibble off the sprigs, buds, bark, &c. of plants; broust, a sprig, young branch, or shoot. — Cot. Bret. brons, brous, a bud; brous-koad, brush-wood; brouskaol, broccoli, cabbage sprouts; brous-gwezen, a shrub; broust, briar, thick bush; brousta, to browse, to grow into a bush. Prov. brotar, to shoot, bud, grow; brossa, OFr. brosses, brosses, Catalan brossa, Sp. broza, thicket, brush-wood; brotar, to sprout, bud, break out as small-pox, &c.; Gris. braussa, low shrubs, as rhododendrons, juniper, &c. Prov. brus, heath. Fr. brosses, brosses, brousses, brouches, brouic, bruc, bushes, briars, heath.—Roquef. Mid. Lat. bruscia, brozia, dumetum. 'Tam de terrâ, bruscosa quam de arabili.'—Duc. Serv. brst, sprouts; brstiti, to browse. OHG. bros, sprout. Bav. bross, brosst, a bud, a sprout. It. brocco, sprocco, broccola, shoot, sprout. Here we find throughout the Romance, Teutonic, Celtic, and Slavonic families, a variety of forms, broc, bros, brost, sproc, spross, sprot, signifying twigs, shoots, sprouts, or bushes and scrubby growths, plants composed of twigs, or broken up into a multitude of points. There can be little doubt that they are all derived from the notion of breaking out, which we find expressed by similar modifications in the termination of the root, brik, bris, brist, brit, to break or burst. See next article, and also Brush, Broach.

Bruise. AS. brysan, OE. brise, to crush.
And he that schal falle on this stone schal be broken, but on whom it schal falle, it schal al to brisen him.—Wicliff.
Fr. briser, to break, crush, bruise extremely.— Cot. OFr. bruiser.— Diez. Prov. brisar, desbrisar, to break to bits ; Gael, bris, brisd, brist ; Port, britar, to break.
A modification of the same root which gives the E. break, the interchange of the final consonants being clearly shown in the derivatives, Prov. brico or brizo, a crum ; briketo, brizeto, bricalio, a little bit ; brizal, dust, fragments ; brizal de carbon, du bris de charbon de terre, coal dust. See Breeze.

Bruit. Fr. bruit, It. bruito, Pr. brüit, a noise, a rumbling, Fr. and It. bruire. Pr. brugir, bruzir, to make a rumbling.
* Brunt. Brunt, insultus, impetus ; styrtyn' or brunton', or sodenly comyn' azen an enmy, insilio, irruo.— Pr. Pm.
Brunt of a daunger, escousse, effort.— Palsgr. The brunt of an engagement is the shock of battle when the two armies actually come in collision.
That in all haste he would join battayle even with the bront or brest of the vangarde.—Hall in R. The fore rydars put themselves in prese with their longe lances to win the first brunte of the field.—Fabyan.
OE. brunt, a blow.
Bot baysment gef myn herte a brunt. Allit. Poems, E. E. Text Soc. A. 174.
All that was bitten of the beste was at a brunt dede.—K. Alexander, p. 134.
OE. burt, to butt.— Pr. Pm. Prov. burs, shock, blow ; burcar, abroncar, Fr. brocher, to strike the foot against an obstacle, to stumble.

Brush. An implement made of bristles or elastic twigs for whisking away small extraneous matters from a surface. It is singular that the word may be derived with equal propriety from the dust or rubbish it is used to remove, or from the materials of which it is itself composed.
Cat. brossa, quisquiliae, sordes, faex ; brossar, detergere ; Gael, brusg, a crum. It. brusco, bruscolo, a mote, fescue ; brusca, a brush ; Swiss bruske, Piedm. brosse, remnants of hay or fodder, orts, brossa, a brush ; Sp. broza, chips, dust, rubbish, brozar, to cleanse, broza, a brush ; Gael. bruis (in the pl.), shivers, splinters, fragments, bruis (sing.), a brush ; E. bris, brist, dust, rubbish. Piedm. bruscia, brustia, a horse-brush, wool-card, brustir, to brush, Lang, broustia, a flax comb, G. borste, bürste, Sw. borste, a brush.
In E. also the word brush had formerly the sense of dust or flue.
(Aga) said. Sir by your speche now right well I here That if ye list ye may do the thing that I most desire. And that is, this your heritage there you liked best That ye might give: and ever among, the brush away she pikid From her clothes here and there, and sighid therewithal.—Chaucer, Beryn.
While cajoling her husband, she kept picking the dust or bits of flue from her clothes to hide her embarrassment. To brush then would be to dust, to clear away the brush or dust and rubbish.
On the other hand, the derivation is equally satisfactory from the twigs or bristles of which the brush is composed. The Lat. scopa signifies in the first instance twigs, and in the second place a besom, while the word besom itself properly signifies twigs, rods. The same relation holds good between G. borste, Sw. borst, a bristle, and G. borste, bürste, Sw. borste, a brush ; NE. brust, a bristle, and Piedm. brustia, a brush, wool-card. Bav. bross, brosst, a bud or sprout ; Bret, brous, a bud, shoot ; brouskoad, brushwood, wood composed of twigs. Prov. bruc, brus, brusc (Dict. Castr.), heath, quasi twigs, a shrub composed of small twigs ; Lang, brousso, a tuft of heath ; Fr. brosse, a bush, bushy ground, also a head-brush, wool-card, flax-comb ; brossettes, small heath whereof head-brushes are made.— Cot. Brusshe, to make brusshes on, bruyere.—Palsgr. 201. It. brusca, ling or heath for brushes.—Fl. ON. bruskr, a bush of hair, tuft of grass or hay, a brush.
Perhaps the explanation of the double origin is to be found in the fact that the words signifying mote, dust, rubbish, and those signifying a sprig, twig, bush, are both derived from modifications of the multiform root signifying break, appearing in Goth. brikan, Gael. bris, brist, Fr. briser. Port. britar. The Bav. bross, brosst, Bret, brous, OFr. broust, a bud, twig, or shoot, seems named from bursting (ON. brista) or breaking out ; or the separate twigs or bristles may be considered as splinters, as It. brusco, bruscolo, bruscetta, a little piece of wood or straw, fescue, mote. But see Bristle.
Bubble. It. bubbola. From an imitation of the sound made by the bubbling liquid. Bohem. bublati, to murmur, bublina, a bubble; Pol. bąbel, a bubble, a tumour; Lith. bubseti, to bubble, boil; bubauti, to bellow as a bull; bubeuti, to thunder gently; bubiti, to beat; bubleti, to bump as a bittern. Sc. bub, a blast of wind.
A bubble and a lump or swelling are very generally designated by the same word, either because a bubble is taken as the type of anything round and swelling, or because the same articulation is used to represent the pop of a bubble bursting, and the sound of a blow, from which the designation of a knob, hump, or projection is commonly taken. Fr. bube, a push, wheal, blister, watery bud, hunch or bump.—Cot. ' Burble in the water—bubette.'—Palsgr. Magy. boh, bub, pup, a bunch, hump, tuft, top, buborek, a bubble.
To Bubble. See Dupe.
Buccanier. A set of pirates in the 17th century, who resorted to the islands and uninhabited places in the West Indies, and exercised their cruelties principally on the Spaniards. The name, according to Olivier Oexmelin, who wrote a history of adventurers in the Indies, is derived from the language of the Caribs. It was the custom of those savages when they took prisoners, to cook their flesh on a kind of grate, called barbacoa (whence the term barbecue; a barbecued hog, a hog dressed whole). The place of such a feast was called boucan (or according to Cotgrave the wooden gridiron itself), and this mode of dressing, in which the flesh was cooked and smoked at the same time, was called in Fr. boucaner.
The natives of Florida, says Laudonnière (Hist. de la Floride, Pref. A.D. 1586, in Marsh), ' mangent toutes leurs viandes rosties sur les charbons et boucanées, c'est à dire quasi cuictes à la fumée.' In Hackluyt's translation ' dressed in the smooke which in their language they call boucaned.' Hence those who established themselves in the islands for the purpose of smoking meat were called buccaniers.—Dict. Etym. The term boucan is still applied in the W. I. to a place used for the drying of produce.
Our next illustration represents the Boucan, or building used for drying and preparing cocoa and coffee. The building is regularly constructed with two floors, the upper for coffee, the lower for cocoa. They are divided by partitions of open lath-work, which is also used in a great portion of the ends and sides of the main building, to allow a free current of air.—Illust. News, March 28, 1857.
Buck. The male goat, also applied to the male deer, and then to other wild animals, as a buck rabbit. W. bwch, Gael. boc, Fr. bouc. Probably named from the tendency of the animal to butt or strike with the forehead. Fin. pukkata, to butt; Esthon. pokkama, to butt, to kick; Magy. bökni, to stick, to butt. Pol. puk, knock, rap, tap; Gael. boc, a knock or blow; Fr. buquer, bucquer, to knock at a door, to butt or jarr; Dan. bukke, to ram down a gun. It. becco is a radically different form, from bek! bek! representing the bleating of a goat.
To Buck. Formerly, when soap was not so plentiful a commodity, the first operation in washing was to set the linen to soak in a solution of wood ashes. This was called bucking the linen, and the ashes used for that purpose were called buck-ashes. The word was very generally spread. In G. it is beuchen, bäuchen, beichen, buchen, büchen, büken; Sw. byka, Dan. byge; Fr. buquer, buer; It. bucatare; Bret. bugad. Sp. bugada, lye. The derivation has been much discussed. The more plausible are:— 1. Dan. bög-aske, the ashes of beechwood, chiefly employed in making potash; but the practice of bucking would have arisen long before people resorted to any particular kind of wood for the supply of ashes.
2. It. bucata, buck-ashes, supposed to be so called from buca, a hole, because the ashes are strained through a pierced dish, in the same way that the term is in Sp. colada, lye, bucking, the linen at buck, from colar, to strain, to filter, to buck, lessiver, faire la lessive. But the analogy does not hold, because bucare does not appear ever to have been used in the sense of straining or filtering.
The true derivation is seen in Gael. bog, moist, soft, tender, and as a verb, to steep or soak. Bret. bouk, soft, tender, boukaat, to soften. The ideas of wet and soft commonly coalesce, as G. erweichen, to soak, from weich, soft; It. molle, soft, wet; Lat. mollire, to soften, and Fr. mouillir, to wet; Pol. mokry, wet; miękki, soft; mięknąć, to soak, to soften; moczyć, to soak foul linen before washing. Bohem. mok, a steep for flax. To buck then would originally be to set the linen to soak in lye, and as m and b so often interchange (comp. W. maban and baban, a baby), the word is probably identical with mok, the root of the Slavonic words above mentioned, and of the Lat. macero, to soak. In Lat. imbuere, the guttural termination is lost, as in Fr. buée for buquée. In the dialect of the Setti Cemmani, where the G. w in the beginning of words is converted into b, G. weich, soft, becomes boch, boach; and weichen, einweichen, to soak, become bochen, boa-chen, inboachen, arguing (as Marsh suggests) an original connection between Gael. bog and G. weich.
Buck-bean. A water-plant with leaves like a bean. Dan. bukke-blad, goat-leaf; N. gjeit-klauv, goat's hoof.
* Bucket. Hardly identical with Fr. baquet (dim. of bac, a trough), a pail or bucket, a small shallow and open tub.—Cot. NE. bouk is a pail; and with the dim. bucket is probably an equivalent of It. bolgia, bolgetta, a budget, also a leather bucket—Fl.; Fr. bouge, a wallet, male or case of leather; bougette, a little coffer or trunk of wood covered with leather. Mid. Lat. bulga, pulga, OHG. bulga, Bav. bulgin, a leathern sack. See Bulk.
* Buckle. A buckle or fastening for a leather strap probably takes its name from the convex shape or from the boss with which it was ornamented. Prov. bocla, bloca, OFr. bocle, boss of a shield, ornamental stud. Fr. boucler, to swell, rise or bear out in the middle.—Cot. To buckle up, of a surface, is to shrivel up, to throw itself into prominences and hollows. Fr. boucle, a curl, a ring. The word is a mere transposition of the elements found in bulk, and as in the case of the latter word, the radical image seems to be a bubble taken as the type of a rounded prominence. It. boccula, Fr. boucle, Sw. dial. bogla, Pol. bulka, a bubble; It. boglire, bollire, to boil. w. boglyn, bubble, boss, knob; dwfr yn boglynu, water a bubbling; bogel, a navel, nave of a wheel; bogeilio, to boss or swell out; G. buckel, protuberance, excrescence, hump, boss, bullion, stud, clasp of a book. Dan. bugle, a boss, bump, swelling, dint; buglet, having a boss, dinted.
Buckler. The Fr. boucle, Prov. bocla, bloca, a buckle or protuberance, were specially applied to the boss of a shield.
Il l'a feru desor l'escu, Dusqu'en la bocle l'a fendu.
Partonopeus de Blois in Rayn.
Hence bouclier, Prov. bloquier, Sp. broquel. It. brocchiere, a buckler or shield with a central boss. So ON. bugnir, a shield, from bugr, convexity.
Buckram. It. bucherame, Fr. bougran, boucaran, Mid.Lat. boquerannus. It is explained by Müller (MHG. Wtb.) as if the stuff was made of goat's hair. It is commonly mentioned as a precious stuff, and the reference to It. bucherare, to pierce holes, is doubtless fallacious. 'Una coltre di bucherame Cipriana bianchissima.'—Boccaccio.
Bucolic. Lat. bucolicus, from Gr. βουκολικός, belonging to the calling of the herdsman; βουκόλος, agreeing with Gael. buachaille, a cowherd, from bo, cattle, and gille, a boy, a servant. w. cail, a fold; ceilio, to pen cattle.
* Bud. The knob or projection formed by the swelling germ of leaves or flowers. The entire train of thought is seen in Hesse botz, potz, crack, loud noise; butzen (Du. botzen, butzen—K.), to knock, to butt; butzen, clump, bunch, tuft; Bav. botzen, butzen, lump, knob; botzen, bud; 'butzen, turgere; buczendig, turgidus.'—Schm. Swab. butz, stroke, blow, prick in a target, rump of fowls; anything short of its kind, a dumpy child. Du. butze, a bump, swelling, botch.—K. Bret. bod, bôden, a tuft, clump, bunch; explaining Fr. rabodé, short and thick of stature. Fr. bouter, to thrust, put, push forwards, to bud or put forth as a tree in the spring (Cot.); bouton, a bud, a pustule; bout, the end or thrusting part of a long body, a stump; un bout d'homme, a stumpy man. So W. pwtio, to poke, thrust, butt; pwt o ddyn, a short thick man. Du. pote, poot, Dan. pode, a shoot, scion, set of a plant; Hesse potten, to graft or bud trees, to set plants.
* Bud, Bus. Behoves. 'I bus goe tyll bedde.' 'And this sacrament bus have three thyngis.'—Hal. This expression may probably be explained by N. bod, bo, message, call; bo, need. 'Du ha inkje bo te gjera da:' you have no need, no call, no business to do that.
Budge. The dressed fur of lambs, a material no doubt early supplied by the pastoral nations of Slavonic race, with whom it is still much in use. Russ. fur, fur, skins; pushit', to line with fur.
To Budge. Bret. boulj, movement; bouljein, Fr. bouger, to move, stir, budge, probably from the notion of bubbling, boiling. Port. bulir; to budge. Nao vos bulais daqui, don't stir from hence, don't budge. Pied. sboge, to stir. ON. bulla, to boil; bullt, motus creber.
Budget. Fr. bougette, dim. of bouge, a budget, wallet, great pouch, or male of leather serving to carry things behind a man on horseback.—Cot. It. bolgia, bolgetta, a budget, leathern bucket. From bulga, a skin.
Buff. A buff sound is a toneless sound as of a blow. Magy. bufogni, to give a dull sound; Pl.D. duff, dull, of colours, sounds, tastes, smells; een duffen toon, a deadened tone; eene duffe couleur, a dull colour.
Buff.—Buffae.—Buffalo. Lat. bubalus, Russ. buivol, Fr. buffle, the buffe, buffle, bugle, or wild ox, also the skin or neck of a buffe.—Cot. The term was then applied to the skin of the buffalo dressed soft, buff leather, and then to the yellowish colour of leather so dressed. It. buffalo, a buffle or a bugle, by metaphor, a block-headed noddy.—Fl. Hence the E. buffle-headed, confused, stupid. The name of the beast seems taken from a representation of his voice. Lith. bubenti, to bellow; Magy. bufogni, to give a hollow sound.
Buff.—Buffet. A blow. From buff! an imitation of the sound of a blow. Pl.D. buffen, to strike; E. rebuff, to repulse; It. buffare, Fr. bouffer, to puff, to blow; It. buffetto, a cuff or buffet, also a blurt or puff with one's mouth. G. puff, a clap, buffet, cuff; Lith. bubiti, to beat. In other cases, as Diez remarks, the word for a stroke is connected with a verb signifying to blow; Fr. soufflet, a buffet, from souffler, to blow; souffleté, often blown upon, boxed on the ear; and the word blow itself is used in both senses.
Buffet. Fr. buffet, a side-board. Fr. buffer, bouffer, to puff, to blow. The primary sense of buffeter seems to have been to take out the vent peg of a cask, and let in the air necessary for drawing out liquor, as from Lith. dausa, air, breath, dausinti, to give air to a cask in order to let the beer run.
Si vos chartiers—amenant pour la provision de vos maisons certain nombre de tonneaux de vin les avaient buffetés et beus à demi, le reste emplissant d'eau, &c.—Rabelais.
Buffeter, to marre a vessel of wine by often tasting it; buffeté, deadened, as wine that hath taken wind, or hath been mingled with water.—Cot. Mid. Lat. bufetarius, Fr. buffeteur, tabernarius, caupo. Bufetarium, the duty paid for retailing wine in taverns. The verb buffeter may thus be translated to tap, buffetier, a tapster. Thus buffet would signify the tap of a public-house or tavern, the place whence the wine was drawn.

From thence it has been transferred in E. to the sideboard on which the drinkables are placed at meals, and in Fr. to the office in a department where other kind of business is carried on, while in Sp. it has passed on to signify simply a desk or writing-table.
Buffoon. Fr. bouffon, a jester, from It. buffa, a puff, a blast or a blurt with the mouth made at one in scorn; buffare, to jest or sport.—Fl. A puff with the mouth is probably indicative of contempt, as emblematically making light of an object. 'And who minds Dick? Dick's nobody! Whoo! He blew a slight contemptuous breath as if he blew himself away.'—David Copperfield. A Staffordshire artisan giving an account of one who had been slighted said, 'They rather puffed at him.'
Bug.—Bugbear.—Boggart.—Bogle. God's boast seemed to him but bugges, things made to feare children.—Z. Boyd in Jam. The meaning of Bug is simply an object of terror, from the cry Bo! Boo! Boh! made by a person, often covering his face to represent the unknown, to frighten children. The use of the exclamation for this purpose is very widely spread. Gael. bo! an interj. to excite terror in children.—Macleod. w. bw! It. bau! 'Far bau! bau!—far paura a' bambini coprendosi la volta.'—La Crusca. Alternately covering the face in this manner to form an object of sportive terror, and then peeping over the covering to relieve the infant from his terror, constitutes the game of Bo-peep, Sc. Teet-bo.
The two children—were playing in an opposite corner, Lillo covering his head with his skirt, and roaring at Ninna to frighten her, then peeping out again to see how she bore it.—Romola, iii. 265.
The cry made to excite terror is then used, either alone or with various terminations, to signify an indefinite object of terror, such as that conjured up by children in the dark.
L'apparer del giorno Che scaccia l' Ombre, il Bau e le Befane!—the peep of day which scatters spectres, bugs, and hobgoblins.—La Crusca.
Swiss baui, bauwi, mumming, bugbear, scarecrow; G. baubau, wauwau, Esthon. popo, Magy. bubus, Sc. boo, bukow (kow, a goblin), human, E. dial. boman, Pl.D. bumann, Limousin bobal, bobaow, W. bw, bwg, bubach, a bugbear, a hobgoblin. Far barabao is explained in Patriarchi's Venetian dict. far bau! bau! to cry boh! and il brutto barabao is interpreted il

Tentennino, il brutto Demonio, the black bug, the buggaboo; W. bwgar, a bugbear (Spurrell), E. dial. bugar, the Devil.—Hal. W. bw! is used as an interjection of threatening, and signifies also terror as well as the terrific object. Manx boa, boo, fear, affright. The repetition of the radical syllable with more or less modification represents the continuance of the terrific sound. The final guttural of W. bwg and E. bug is found in Illyrian bukati, Magy. bögni, to bellow, bögni, to roar; Swiss boöggen, to bellow like an angry bull when he paws the ground; boögg, bögk, bök, a mask or disguise (from being originally adopted with the intention of striking terror), a misshapen person. The name of bugabo was given, according to Coles, to an 'ugly wide-mouthed picture' carried about at May games. Lith. bauginti, to terrify; bugti, to take fright, to take bug, as it is provincially expressed in England.—Hal. To take buggart or boggart is used in the same sense, and a boggarty horse is one apt to start, to take fright. With a different termination we have W. bwgwl, threatening, terrifying; Sc. bogil, bogle, bogil boo (E. buggaboo), a spectre, bugbear, scarecrow; Lesachthal, föggile, pöggl, a bugbear for children, and thence an owl from its nightly hooting.—Deutsch. Mundart. iv. 493. Lett. baiglis, an object of terror. Russ. pugať, pujať, to frighten; pugalo, pujalo, a scarecrow. In bug-bear or bear-bug, the word is joined with the name of the beast taken as an object of dread.

The humour of melancholye Causith many a man in slepe to cry, For fere of beris or of bolis blake, Or ellis that blake buggys wol him take. Chaucer. where we find imaginary bulls and bears classed with bugs as objects of nightly terror.

Bug. 2. The name of bug is given in a secondary sense to insects considered as an object of disgust and horror, and in modern English is appropriated to the noisome inhabitants of our beds, but in America is used as the general appellation of the beetle tribe. They speak of a tumble-bug, rose-bug. A similar application of the word signifying an object of dread, to creeping things, is very common. Russ. bukashka, a beetle, is the dim. of buka, a bug-bear. The W. bwcai signifies what produces dread or disgust, and also bugle a maggot. It. baco, a silk-worm, also a boa-peep or vain bug-bear; baco-baco, boa-peep.—Fl. Limousin bobaou, bobal, a bug-bear, is also used as the generic name of an insect.—Béronie. So in Albanian boube, a bug-bear, and in child's language any kind of insect. Magy. bubus, bug-bear, Serv. buba, vermin. It. bau, bug-bear, Grisons bau, insect, beetle; bau (Püreglia, earwig; bau da grascha, dung-beetle. Sw. troll, a goblin, monster, provincially an insect. In Norse applied especially to beetles or winged insects.—Aasen. Illyr. gad, disgust, insect. Lap. rábme, an insect, worm, any disgusting animal, also a bug-bear, ghost. Sp. coco, a worm, also a bug-bear.

Bug. 3. 1. Swelling, protuberant. See Big. * 2. The word has a totally different origin in the expression bug words, fierce, high-sounding words. 'Cheval de trompette, one whom no big nor bug words can terrify.'—Cot. Parolone, high, big, roaring, swollen, long, great or bug words.—Fl. 'Bug as a lord.' In my time at Rugby school bug was the regular term for conceited, proud. Bogge, bold, forward, saucy.—Grose. In this sense of the word it seems to rest on the notion of frightening with a loud noise, blustering, threatening, and is thus connected with bug, bug-bear. Swiss boöggen, to bellow like an angry bull; boögg, bögk, a proud overbearing man—Stalder; bög, larva (a bug-bear, hobgoblin); böögg, superbire.—Schmidt. Idioticon Bernense.

Bugle. 1. Same as buffle, a buffalo. These are the beasts which ye shall eat of: oxen, shepe and goates, hert, roo, and bugle.—Bible, 1551. Deut. xiv. Hence bugle-horn, properly a buffalo horn, then a horn for drinking, or on which notes are played in hunting. Janus sits by the fire with double berd And drinketh of his bugle horn the wine. Chaucer. Lat. bucula, juvenca. Mid.Lat. buculus, OFr. bugle, buffle, boeuf sauvage.—Roquef. Probably, as Buffalo, from the cry of the animal; Serv. bukati, Magy. bögni, Fr. bugler, beugler, to bellow. 2. An ornament of female dress consisting of fragments of very fine glass pipes sewn on. 'Et dictas dominæ nunc portant bugolos qui sic nominantur, quos cooperiunt capillis capitis earum ligatis.

supra dictos bugolos.'—De moribus civium Placentiae.—A.D. 1388. Muratori.
To Build. From ON. bua, OSw. boa, bo, G. bauen, to till, cultivate, inhabit, were formed bol, a farm, byli, a habitation, OSw. bol, bole, byli, domicilium, sedes, villa, habitaculum, whence bylja, to raise a habitation, to build, or, as it was formerly written in English to bylle.
That city took Josue and destroyed it and cursed it and alle hem that tylled it again.—Sir Jno. Mandeville.

Bulb. Lat. bulbus, Gr. βολβος, a tuberous or bulbous root ; Lith. bulbe, bulwis, the potato ; G. bolle, bulle, bulbe, a bulb ; Du. bol, bolle, a globe, ball, head ; bol, bolleken van loock, the head of an onion. Gr. βολβα, Lat. vulva, the womb.
From the image of a bubble taken as the type of anything round, swollen, hollow. In the representation of natural sounds, the position of liquids in the word is very variable. In English, as well as bubble, we have blob or bleb and blubber in the same sense. The Walach. has bulbuk, a bubble, and bulbuká, to bubble up, to spring, swell, be protuberant. See next article.

Bulch. A bunch or projection. NE. buhe, a bunch.—Hal. ' Bourser, to gather, make bulch, or bear out as a full purse, to bunt or leave a bunt in a sail.'—Cot. Ptg. bolso, pocket, also the bunt or hollow of a sail.

Bulge. See Bulk.

Bulk. I. Bulk, in Sc. and N. of E. bouk, the carcase, chest, trunk, body of an animal, mass, principal portion. ' My liver leapt within my bulk!'—Turberville. Bav. bülken, the body ; Du. bulcke, thorax ; buick, beuck, trunk of the body, belly ;—van de kerche, nave or body of the church ;—van 't schip, hold or bilge of a ship.—Kil. ON. bukr, trunk, body, belly ; Sw. buk, Dan. bug, G. bauch, belly ; Cat. buc, the belly, bed of a river, bulk or capacity of anything, body of a ship ; Sp. bugue, the capacity or burden of a ship, hull of a ship.
The comparison of the Celtic dialects leads strongly to the conviction that the radical image is the boiling or bubbling up of water, whence we pass to the notion of anything swelling or strouting out, of an inflated skin, stuffed bag, or of what is shaped like a bubble, a prominence, knob, boss, lump. For the latter sense compare Da. bulk, a projection, lump, unevenness ; Sw. dial. bullka, a protuberance, knot in thread, a dint in a metal vessel. ' Bossé, knobby, bulked or bumped out.'—Cot.
The radical sense is shown in Russ. bulkat', to bubble up ; Pol. bulka, a bubble ; Gael. balg, bolg, bubble (balgan uisge, a water-bubble), blister, bag, wallet, boss of shield, belly, womb, bellows ; builgean, bubble, bladder, pimple, pouch ; builgeadh, bubbling up, as water beginning to boil ; bolg, bulg, belly, anything prominent, a lump or mass, the hold of a ship ; bolg (as verb), blow, swell, puff, blister ; Manx bolg, bolgan, bubble, blister, belly, boss, knob, globule ; bolg-lhu-ingey, the bilge or hold of a ship ; bolgey, to blow, swell, blister. W. bwlg, a round bulky body ; bwlgan, a straw corn-vessel. ' Bulgas Galli sacculos scorteos vocant.'—Festus.
Passing to the Scandinavian and Teutonic dialects we have Goth. balgs, skin bag; G. balg, skin of an animal, husk, pod ; ON. belgr, skin flayed whole, leather sack, belly; belgja, bolgna, Dan. bulne, to swell, to puff up ; bolginn, swollen ; OE. bolnyn, tumeo, turgeo ; bolnyd, tumidus.—Pr. Pm. ' See how this tode bolneth.'—Palsgr. MHG. bilge, bale, bulgen; gebolgen, to swell. The addition of a dim. or feminine termination gives Bav. bulgen. It. bolgia, bolgetta, a leather sack or budget ; Fr. boulge, bouge, a leathern sack or portmanteau, a strouting or standing out in a flat piece of work, boss of a buckler, belly, outleaning in the middle of a wall (Cot.), bulge or convex part of a cask. Hence E. bulge or bilge, the belly or convex part of a ship ; to bulge, to belly out, to throw out a convexity. With these must probably be classed ON. bulki, the contents of the hold, or cargo of a ship, consisting of a heap of sacks bound down and covered with skins. Bolke or hepe, cumulus, acervus.—Pr. Pm. ON. at riufa bulkann, to undo the cargo, to break bulk. Lett. pulks, Lith. pulkas, a heap, crowd, herd, swarm ; pulkė, in bulk, in mass.

2. A bulk is a partition of boards, the stall or projecting framework for the display of goods before a shop. Here stand behind this bulk, straight will he come : Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home. Othello. ' He found a country fellow dead drunk, snorting on a bulk.'—Anat. Melancholy. In this latter sense the word is identical with It. balco, balcone, a projection before a window ; ' also the bulk or stall of a shop.'—Fl. Palco, a stage or scaffold; palchetto, a box or boarded inclosure at a theatre. The original sense seems to be a framework of balks, beams or boards, as It. assito, a beam or rafter, also a partition of deals instead of a wall.—Fl. Dan. dial. bulk, bulke, boarded partition in a barn. A bulk-head is a boarded partition in a ship.

Bull. 1. The male of the ox kind. W. bwla, Lith. bullus, ON. bolli, bauli, a bull, baula, a cow, from baula, N.Fris. bolli, to bellow. G. bulle, bullocks, a bull; Swiss bullen, to bellow.

2. A papal rescript, from Lat. bulla, the seal affixed to the document. The primary signification of bulla is a bubble, from the noise, whence bullire, to bubble, to boil. Thence the term was applied to many protuberant objects, as the ornamental heads of nails, the hollow ornament of gold hung round the neck of the young nobility of Rome; in subsequent times applied to the seal hanging by a band to a legal instrument. It. bolla, a seal, stamp, round glass phial, boss, stud, bubble, blister, pimple. See Billet.

Bullace. The wild plum. Bret. bolos or polos, W. bwlas. Fr. bellocier, a bullace tree. It. bulloi, bullos, sloes.—Fl.

Bullbeggar. Terriculamentum, a scare-bug, a bull-begger, a sight that frayeth and frighteth.—Higins in Pr. Pm.

And they have so fraid us with bull-beggers, spirits, witches, urchens, elves, &c., and such other bugs that we are afraid of our own shadows.—Scot's Desc. of Witchcr. in N.

The word is of a class with Pl.D. bullerbak, bullerbrook, a noisy violent fellow, W. bwbach, Du. bullebak, a hobgoblin, bugbear, scarecrow, where the former element signifies the roaring noise made to terrify the child by the person who represents the hobgoblin. Pl.D. bullern, Du. bulderen, G. poltern, to make a loud noise; Du. buldergheesten, lemures nocturni nigri.—Kil. G. poltergeist, a hobgoblin. The final element in the forms above cited seems a corrupt repetition of the syllable bug, signifying roaring, and thence terror, as in E. bug-gaboo, G. butzibau, Du. bietebau. The connection between the ideas of loud noise and terror is well illustrated by the use of Pl.D. buller in addressing children to signify something terrible: 'Gae du nig bi dat buller-water,' do not go by the dangerous water, as a mill-dam or the like. See Bug, Bully.

Bullet. Fr. boulet, dim. of boule, a bowl. See Bowl.

As an instance of the arbitrary way in which words acquire their precise meaning, it may be observed that a bullet in E. is applied to the ball of a gun or musket, while the projectile of a cannon is called a ball. In Fr., on the contrary, it is boulet de canon, balle de fusil.

Bullhead.—Bullrush.—Bullfrog. Bullhead is the name of the miller's thumb, a little fish nearly all head, also of the tadpole or young frog. Bullrush is a large kind of rush. The element bull is probably not taken from the quadruped of that name, but is more probably identical with Sw. bål, bole or trunk of a tree, bulk of a thing, large, coarse, thick, blunt, large of its kind, as geting, a wasp, bål-geting, a hornet. W. pwl, blunt, penbwl, a blockhead, a tadpole; Gael. pollach, lumpish, stupid; poll-cheannach, lump-headed; poll-cheannan, a tadpole. The bullfrog, however, is said to make a loud bellowing noise, which may probably be the origin of the name.

Bullion. This word is used in several senses. 1. A boss or stud, any embossed work. Sp. bollar, to emboss; bollon, stud, brass-headed nail; bollos de relieve, embossed work. Fr. bouillon, a stud, any great-headed or studded nail.—Cot. Elyot translates bulla 'a bullion set on the cover of a book or other thynge.' 'Bullyon in a woman's girdle—clow.' Palsgr. 'Bullions and ornaments of plate engraven, a bullion of copper set on bridles or poitrels for an ornament.'—Baret's Alveary in Hal. Here the notion of swelling or embossment is derived from the bubbling of boiling water.

2. Bullion is applied to a particular kind of gold and silver lace, from Fr. bouillon, explained by Chambaud as being made of a very fine sheet of gold or silver twisted. Doubtless from bouillon in the sense of a puff or bunch, from the puffy texture of this kind of lace.

3. Gold or silver uncoined. Considerable difficulty has been felt in accounting for the word in this sense, from the use of the equivalent terms, billons in Fr. and vellon in Sp., in the sense of base metal, silver mixed with a large alloy of copper. The original meaning of the word bullion, boillon, billon, was the mint or office where the precious metals were reduced to the proper alloy and converted into stamped money, from the Lat. bulla, a seal, whence Mod.Gr. βουλλώνω, to seal, to stamp; βουλλωτήριον, the matrix or die with which coins were stamped.—Dict. Etym.
In this sense the word appears in our early statutes. The Stat. 9 E. III. st. 2, c. 2, provides, that all persons 'puissent sauvement porter à les eschanges ou bullion et ne mie ailleurs argent en plate, vessel d'argent et toutz maners d'argent sauve faux monoie et l'esterling counterfeit,' for the purpose of exchange.
In the English version these words are erroneously translated 'that all people may safely bring to the exchanges bullion or silver in plate, &c.,' which has led to the assertion that 'bullion' in the old statutes is used in the modern application of uncoined gold or silver. The 27 Ed. III. St. 2, c. 14, provides, 'que toutz marchantz—puissent savement porter—plate d'argent, billettes d'or et tut autre maner d'or et toutz moneys d'or et d'argent à nostre bullione ou à nous eschanges que nous ferons ordeiner à nous dites estaples et ailleurs pemant illoeqs money de notre coigne convenablement à la value.' Again, 4 Hen. IV. c. 10, 'que la tierce partie de tout la monoie d'argent que sera porte à la boillion sera faite es mayles et ferlynges'—shall be coined into halfpence and farthings.
In these and other statutes all trafficking in coin was forbidden, except at the bullion or exchanges of the king; and similar restrictions were enforced in France, where the tampering with the coin was carried to a much greater extent than in England, insomuch as to earn for Philippe le Bel the title of le faux monnoyeur. Hence among the French the carrying to the billon their decried money became a familiar operation of daily life, and 'porter au billon,' 'mettre au billon,' are metaphorically applied to things that require remaking.
The decried coin brought to be melted up was termed 'monnaie de billon,' and hence billon and the equivalent Spanish vellon were very early used to signify the base mixture of which such coin was made, or generally a mixture of copper and silver. 'Ne quis aurum, argentum vel billionem extra regnum nostrum deferre præsumat.'—Stat. Philip le Bel in Duc. A.D. 1305.
In England the fortunes of the word have been different, and the Mint being regarded chiefly as the authority which determined the standard of the coin, the name of bullion has been given to the alloy or composition of the current coin permitted by the Bullion or mint. Thus bullion is translated in Torriano's dictionary (A.D. 1687), 'lega, legaggio di metallo,' and traces of the same application are preserved in the Spanish reckoning in 'reals vellon,' reals of standard currency. From metal of standard fineness the signification has naturally passed in modern times to all gold and silver designed for the purpose of coinage.
Bully.—Bully-rook. A violent overbearing person. Du. bulderen, bolderen, blaterare, debacchari, intonare, minari; verbulderen, perturbare sævis dictis.—Kil. G. poltern, to make a noise; Sw. buller, noise, clamour, bustle, buller-bas, a blusterer; Pl.D. buller-jaan (bully-John), buller-bak, buller-brook, a noisy blustering fellow, from the last of which is doubtless our bully-rock or bully-rook, a hectoring, boisterous fellow.—Bailey. Bully-rock, un faux brave.—Miege in Hal. The Sw. buller-bas, on the other hand, agrees with E. blunder-buss, a clumsy fellow who does things with noise and violence. G. polterer, a blunder-head, blunder-buss, a boisterous, violent, furious man.—Küttner. To bully is to bluster, to terrify by noise and clamour, to behave tyrannically or imperiously.
Bulwark. A defence originally made of the boles or trunks of trees, then in general a rampart, bastion, or work of defence. Du. bol-werck, block-werck, propugnaculum, agger, vallum.—Kil. Fr. by corruption boulevart, boulevard, primarily the ramparts of a town, then applied to the walks and roads on the inside of the ramparts, and now at Paris to a broad street surrounding what was formerly the body, but now is the central part of the town. It. baluarte.
Bum. For bottom. Fris. bôm, ground, bottom, from boden, bodem, ON. bottn, AS. botm. Fris. ierd-boeyme, ierd-beame, the soil. Hence bôm and bôn, a floor. D. buene, boene, G. bühne, a stage, scaffold.
To Bum.—Boom.—Bump.—Bumble. To bum, to hum, to make a droning sound.—Hal. Du. bommen, resonare, to beat a drum; bombammen, to ring the bells. Lat. bombilare, to bumble or make a humming noise; bombilus, Du. bommele, hommele, a bumble-, or a humble-bee. The cry of the bittern, which he is supposed to make by fixing his bill in a reed or in the mud, is called bumping or bumbling.
Bum-bailiff. From the notion of a humming, droning, or dunning noise the term bum is applied to dunning a person for a debt. To bum, to dun.—Hal. Hence bum-bailiff, a person employed to dun one for a debt, the bailiff employed to arrest for debt. The ordinary explanation of bum-bailiff is a mere guess. No one ever saw the word in that shape. Moreover the bum-bailiff is not the person who gives security to the sheriff, nor would it concern the public if he did. But his special office is to dun or bum for debts, and this is the point of view from which he would be regarded by the class who have most occasion to speak of him.

Bumboat. A boat in which provisions are brought for sale alongside a ship. Du. bum-boot, a very wide boat used by fishers in S. Holland and Flanders, also for taking a pilot to a ship.—Roding, Marine Dict. Probably for bun-boot, a boat fitted with a bun or receptacle for keeping fish alive.

Bump. Pl.D. bums! an interjection imitating the sound of a blow. Bums! getroffen. Bang! it's hit. Bumsen, bum-sen, to strike so as to give a dull sound. To bam, to pummel, to beat.—Hal. w. pwmpio, to thump, to bang. Lang. poumpi, to knock ; poumpido, noise, knocking. Then, as in other cases, the word representing the sound of the blow is applied to the lump raised by the blow, or to the mass by which it is given, and signifies consequently a mass, protuberance, lump. See Boss. Thus E. bump, a swelling, w. pwmp, a round mass ; pwmpl, a knob, a boss ; Lith. pumpa, a button, pumpurras, a bud. Fr. pompette, a pumple or pimple on the skin—Cot. ; pompon, a pumpion or gourd, a large round fruit.

Bumpkin. A clumsy, awkward clown. Probably from bump, signifying one who does things in a thumping, abrupt manner. Pl.D. bums-wise, inconsiderately, from bunsen, to strike ; E. dial. bungersome, clumsy, lungeous, awkward.—Hal. Suffolk bonka, large, strapping, applied to young persons, especially girls.—Moor. Manx bonkan, a clown.

Bun, 1.—Bunnion. Fr. bigne, a bump, knob rising after a knock ; bignet, bugnet, little round loaves or lumps made of fine meal, &c., buns, lenten loaves.—Cot. It. bugno, bugnone, any round knob or bunch, a boil or blain.—Fl. Hence E. bunnion, a lump on the foot ; bunny, a swelling from a blow.—Forby. Bony, or grete knobbe, gibbus, gibber, callus.—Pr. Pm. Sc. bannock, bonnock, Gael. bonnach, Ir. boineog, a cake, are dim. forms. Radically identical with Dan. bunke, a heap. See Bunch.

Bun, 2.—Bunny. Bun, a dry stalk ; bunnel, a dried hemp-stalk.—Hal. 'Kyx or bunne, or dry weed (bunne of dry weed, H.S.P.), calamus.'—Pr. Pm. Bun, the stubble of beans.—Mrs Baker. Sc. bune or boon, the useless core of flax or hemp from which the fibre is separated. Bune-wand, a hemp-stalk. The word is probably to be explained from Gael. bun, root, stock, stump, bottom ; bun feoir, hay stubble ; bunan, stubble ; Manx bun, stump, stalk, root, foundation ; w. bon, stem or base, stock, trunk, butt end. The buns are the dried stalks of various kinds of plants left after the foliage has withered away. Gael. bun eich, an old stump of a horse. Bun-feaman (stump-tail), a tail (Macleod), should probably be a short tail, explaining E. bunny, a rabbit, whose short tail in running is very conspicuous. Bun, a rabbit, the tail of a hare.—Hal. Dan. bund, bottom, seems to unite Gael. bun with ON. botn, E. bottom.

Bunch.—Bunk.—Bung. Bunch, a hump, cluster, round mass of anything. To bunch was formerly and still is provincially used in the sense of striking. Dunchyn or bunchyn, tundo.—Pr. Pm. 'He buncheth me and beateth me, il me pousse. Thou bunchest me so that I cannot sit by thee.'—Palsgr. Related on the one side to Pl.D. bunsen, bumsen, to knock. 'An de dor bunsen, oder anklop-pen dat idt bunset,'—to knock at the door till it sounds again. Daal bunsen, to bang down, throw down with a bang. 'He fult dat et bunsede,' he fell with a bang. Du. buns, a knock. See Bounce. On the other hand bunch is connected with a series of words founded on forms similar to the ON. banga, Dan. banke, OSw. bunga, to beat, to bang ; ON. bunki, a heap ; OSw. bunke, a heap, a knob ; and related with ON. bunga, to swell out ; E. dial. bung, a heap or cluster, a pocket ; Sw. binge, a heap ; Wall. bonge, bongie, a bunch ; Magy. bunka, a knob, a boil (punkos bot, a knotty stick) ; Sw. bunke, a bowl ; Pl.D. bunken, the large prominent bones of an animal (as G. knochen, E. knuckles, from knock) ; It. bugno, bugnone, any round knob or bunch, a boil or blain.—Fl. Again, as we have seen E. bulk passing into Sp. bulto, and E. bult, a bag or sack, while bulch was traced through Gris. bulscha, a wallet, E. bulse, a bunch—Hal. ; Sp. bolsa, a purse ; so the form bunk, a knob or heap, passes into Dan. bundt, Sw. bunt, a bunch, bundle, truss ; E.

bunt of a sail, the middle part of it, which is purposely formed into a kind of bag to catch the wind.—B.
Bundle. AS. byndel, Du. bond, bon-del, bundel, something bound together; ghebondte, ghebundte, colligatio, fascis, et contignatio, coassatio; bondel-loos, loosed from bonds.—Kil. ON. bindini, a bundle.
Bung. The stopper for the hole in a barrel. From the hollow sound made in driving in the bung. OG. bunge, a drum; OSw. bungande, the noise of drums.—Ihre. Magy. bongani, to hum. So Du. bommen, to hum, and bomme, or bonde van t' vat, the bung of a barrel; Lim. boundica, to hum, Prov. bondir. Cat. bonir, to resound, and Du. bonde, Fr. bonde, bondon, a bung. It is possible, however, that the primitive meaning of bung may be a bunch of something thrust in to stop the hole. Bung of a tonne or pype, bondel; bundell, bondeau.—Palsgr. 202.
The Fr. bouchon, a cork, boucher, to stop, are from bousche, bouche, a bunch or tuft, and the Sw. tapp (whence tæppa, to stop, and E. tap, the stopper of a cask), is originally a wisp or bunch; ho-tapp, halm-tapp, a wisp of hay or straw.
To Bungle. To do anything awk-wardly, to cobble, to botch.—B. From the superfluous banging and hammering made by an unskilful worker. ON. bang, knocking, racket, working in wood (especi-ally with an axe), banga, to knock, to work at carpentry; bangan, böngun, knocking, unskilful working, especially in wood-work; banghagr, a bungler. Sw. bäng, noise, racket; bangla, to gingle. Sw. dial. bangla, to work ineffectually.—Rietz. Compare G. klempern, klimpern, to gingle, tinkle, tinker; to strum or play unskilfully on an instrument; stümpeln, stümpern, to strum on an instrument, to bungle, to do a thing bunglingly. Banff. bummle, to strum on an instrument, to sing or play in a blundering manner; bummle, a botch, clumsy performance.
Bunny. See Bun.
Bunt. The belly or hollow of a sail, the middle part of a sail formed into a kind of bag to receive the wind.—Hal. Dan. bundt, a bunch, bundle.
To Bunt.—Bunting. To bunt in Somerset is to sift, to bolt meal, whence bunting, bolting-cloth, the loose open cloth used for sifting flour, and now more generally known as the material of which flags are made.
The radical import is probably the impulse by which the meal is driven backwards and forwards. Bret. bounta, bunta, to push, knock, shove; E. dial. punt, to shove, to push with the head (Mrs Baker), to kick. To bunt, to push with the head. Pl.D. bunsen, to knock.
* Buoy. Du. boei, Sw. boj, G. boie, boye, Fr. bouée, Sp. boya, the float of an anchor or of a net; boyar, to float. Lat. boia, Fr. buie, a clog or heavy fetters for the neck or feet. It. bove, buove, fetters, shackles, gyves, clogs, stocks or such punishments for prisoners.—Fl. The most usual form would be a heavy clog fastened by a chain to the limb, and hence the name would seem to have been transferred to the wooden log which would be the earliest float for an anchor. N.Fris. bui, the heavy clog of a foot-shackle; an anchor buoy.—Johansen, p. 100.
Burble. A bubble. Sp. borbollar, to boil or bubble up. Lith. burboloti, to guggle as water, rumble as the bowels. Burbulas, a water bubble made by rain. See Barbarous.
Burden. A load. AS. byrthen, G. bürde, from beran, to bear.
Burden, of a song. See Bourdon.
Bureau. The Italian buio, dark, was formerly pronounced buro, as it still is in Modena and Bologna.—Muratori. Russ. buruii, brown; burjat, to become brown or russet. 'Burrhum antiqui quod nunc dicimus rufum.'—Festus in Diez. OFr. bure, buret, Sp. buriel, Prov. buret, reddish brown, russet, specially applied to the colour of a brown sheep, then to the coarse woollen cloth made of the fleeces of such sheep without dyeing. So in Pol. bury, dark grey; bura, a rain-cloak of felt. Then as the table in a court of audience was covered with such a cloth, the term bureau was applied to the table or the court itself, whence in modern Fr. it is used to signify an office where any business is transacted. In English the designation has passed from a writing-table to a cabinet containing a writing-table, or used as a receptacle for papers. See Borel.
Burganet. OFr. bourguignote, Sp. borgonota, a sort of helmet, properly a Burgundian helmet. A la Borgonota, in Burgundian fashion.
Burgeon.—Burly. To burgeon, to grow big about or gross, to bud forth.—Bailey. Fr. bourgeon, bourjon, the young bud, sprig, or putting forth of a vine, also a pimple in the face.—Cot. The word is variously written in OE. burion, bourion,

Sp. borujon, protuberance, knob. Lang. boure, bourou, a bud, boura, bouronna, to bud; Fr. abourioner, to bud or sprout forth.—Cot. Burryn, to bud.—Pr. Pm.
The primary origin of the word, as of so many others signifying swelling, is an imitation of the sound of bubbling water, preserved in Gael. bururus, a purling sound, a gurgling; Fin. purrata, cum sonitu bullio ut aqua ad proram navis, strideo ut spuma vel aqua ex terra expressa; puret, a bubble; Du. borrelen, to spring as water; borrel, a bubble.
From the notion of a bubble we pass to the Gael. borr, to swell, become big and proud, explaining the E. burgeon. 'Bouffer, to puff, blow, swell up or strout out, to burgeon or wax big.'—Cot. The Gael. has also borr, borra, a knob, bunch, swelling; borr-shuil, a prominent eye; borracha, a bladder, explaining Sp. borracha, a wine skin. Sw. dial. purra, to puff up; borra sig utsa, to swell oneself out as birds; borras, to swell with pride. From the same root E. burly, big, occupying much space.
Elpes arn in Inderiche On bodi borlic berges ilike. Bestiary. Nat. Antiq. i. 122.

Burgess.—Burgher. OE. burgeise, OFr. burgeois, from Lat. burgensis.
Burgh.—See Borough.
Burglar. A legal term from the Lat. burgi latro, through the Burgundian form lare (Vocab. de Vaud.), OFr. lerre, a robber. It. grancelli, roguing beggars, bourglairs.—Fl. Bret. laer, robber.
Omnes burgatores domorum vel fractores Ecclesiarum vel murorum vel portarum civitatis regis vel burgorum intrantes malitiose et felonice condemnentur morti.—Officium Coronatoris in Duc.

Burin.—See under Bore.
To Burl.—Burler. In the manufacturing of cloths the process of clearing it of the knots, ends of thread, and the like, with little iron nippers called burling irons, is termed burling.—Todd. A burler is a dresser of cloth. Lang. bouril, Castrais bourril, the flocks, ends of thread, &c., which disfigure cloth and have to be plucked off. Bourril de neou, flock of snow. OE. burle of cloth, tumentum.—Pr. Pm. From Fr. bourre, flocks. See Burr.
Burlesque. It. burlare, to make a jest of, to ridicule. Probably a modification of the root which gave the OE. bourd, a jest. Limousin bourdo, a lie, a jest, bourda, to ridicule, to tell lies. The interchange of d and l is clearly seen in the Gael. burd, burl, mockery, ridicule, joking; buirte, a jibe, taunt, repartee; buirleadh, language of folly or ridicule.
Burly. See Burgeon.
To Burn. Probably, as Diefenbach suggests, from the roaring sound of flame. Thus G. brinnen or brennen was formerly used in the sense of to roar. Also ein luwe brennen.—Dief. Supp. Herumgehen wie ein brinnenden lew, sicut leo rugiens. Brennen, fremere.—Notk. Ps. 56. 5. in Schm. Swiss Rom. brinna, to roar like the wind in trees.—Bridel. Hence G. brandung, the roaring surge of the sea. In the same way ON. brimi, fire, is connected with brim, surge or dashing of the sea; brima, to surge, and OG. brimmen, bremmen, to roar (as lions, bears, &c.). So also Sw. brasa, a blaze, Fr. embraser, to set on fire, compared with G. brausen, to roar, and Dan. brase, to fry. It is probable indeed that Fr. brûler, which has given much trouble to etymologists, must be explained on the same principle from G. brüllen or brüllen (Dief. Supp.), to roar, the s in OFr. brusler being a faulty spelling, as in cousteau. Compare also Piedm. brüsé, to burn, Prov. bruzir, to roar, with Dan. bruse, to roar, to effervesce. Han bruser op, he fires up. E. brustle, to rustle, crackle like straw or small wood in burning—Hal.; It. brustolare, to burn, toast, broil, singe or scorch with fire.—Fl.

Burn. A brook. Goth. brunna, ON. brunnr, G. born, brunnen, a well, a spring; Gael. burn, water, spring-water; burnach, watery. Swiss Rom. borni, a fountain.—Vocab. de Vaud. As we have seen the noise of water bubbling up represented by the syllable bor, pur (see Burgeon), the final n in burn may be merely a subsidiary element, as the l in purl, and the word would thus signify water springing or bubbling up. Bav. burren, to hum, to buzz; Gael. bururus, warbling, purling, gurgling. Walach. sbornoi, to murmur.
Burnish. Fr. brunir, to polish. Sw. bryna, to sharpen, to give an edge to, brynsten, a whetstone, from bryn, the brim or edge of anything, N. brun, an edge or point. Then as sharpening a weapon would be the most familiar example of polishing metal, the word seems to have acquired the sense of polishing. So from Fin. tahko, an edge, a margin, latus rei angulatae; tahkoinen, angular; tahkoa, to sharpen on a whetstone, thence, to rub, to polish. Bav. schleiffen, to sharpen, to grind on a whetstone, hauben schleiffen, to polish helmets.—Schm.

The AS. brun seems to have been used in the sense of an edge.
Geata dryhten Gryre-fahne sloh Incge lafe, Thæt sio ecg gewæc, Brun on bane.—Beowulf, 5150.
Translated by Kemble,—'The Lord of the Geats struck the terribly coloured with the legacy of Incg so that the edge grew weak, brown, upon the bone;' but it would both make better sense and be more in accordance with AS. idiom if brun were understood as a synonym of ecg.

Burr. I. The whirring sound made by some people in pronouncing the letter r, as in Northumberland. This word seems formed from the sound.—Jam. 'Hearing the old hall clock—strike 12 with a dismal, shuffling, brokenharpstringed-like whirr and burr.'—Matrimonial Vanity Fair, iii. 225. Burr is related to buzz as whirr to whizz. With a slightly different spelling, birr signifies the whizzing sound of a body hurled through the air, whence birr, force, impetus, any rapid whirling motion.—Hal. The noise of partridges when they spring is called birring. G. burren, purren, to buzz, whirr, coo, purr, Swiss burren, to mutter; Sw. dial. borra, to buzz like a beetle; burra, blurra, to chatter, talk fast and indistinctly.

2. Burr or Bur is used in several senses, ultimately resting on the Gael. root borr, signifying protrude, swell, mentioned under Burgeon. Hence Fr. bourre, stuffing, whatever is used to make a texture swell or strout out, and thence flocks of wool, hair, &c., also any such trash as chaff, shales, husks, &c.—Cot. It. borra, any kind of quilting or stuffing, shearing of cloth, also all such stuff as hay, moss, straw, chips or anything else that birds make their nests with.—Fl. Fr. bourrer, to stuff; bourrelet, bourlet, a pad, a stuffed wreath used for different purposes, as for the protection of a child's head, or for supporting a pail of water carried upon the head, a horse-collar (whence bourrelier, a harness or collar maker); and met. an annular swelling, as the swelling above the grafted part of the stem of a tree, the thickened rim at the mouth of a cannon. Hence must be explained E. bur, the rough annular excrescence at the root of a deer's horn, the ridge or excrescence made by a tool in turning or cutting metal, the superfluous metal left in the neck of the mould in casting bullets. A burr-pump is one used in a ship 'into which a staff seven or eight feet long is put having a burr or knob of wood at the end.'—Harris in Todd. In a met. sense a burr round the moon is the padding of hazy light by which it seems to be encircled when it shines through a light mist.
And burred moons foretell great storms at night.—Clare.

3. When the hop begins to blossom it is said to be in burr. See Burgeon.

4. Fris. borre, burre, Dan. borre, Sw. kardborre, karborre, a bur, the hooked capitulum of the arctium lappa. Sw. dial. borre is also a fircone.

Burrow. Shelter, a place of defence, safety, shelter. Provincially applied to shelter from the wind: 'the burrow side of the hedge;' 'a very burrow place for cattle.' The same word with burgh, borough, borrow, from AS. beorgan, to protect, shelter, fortify, save. Du. berghen, to hide, cover, keep, preserve, and thence bergh, a port, a barn or cupboard.—Kil. G. bergen, verbergen, to hide; ON. biarga, to save, preserve. A rabbit burrow is the hole which the animal digs for its own protection. So in W. caer is a castle or fortress, cwning-gaer, the fortress of a coney or rabbit, a rabbit burrow.

Burse. — Burser. -burse. Burse, Fr. bourse, Du. beurs, an exchange, from Fr. bourse. It. borsa, a purse. Bursar, the officer who bears the purse, makes the disbursements of the college. Borsa is derived by Diez from Gr. βύρσα, Mid.Lat. byrsa, skin, leather, but it is more probably a development of It. bolgia, bolza,—Grisons bulscha, buscha, a wallet or scrip, from whence we pass through Sp. bolsa to It. borsa, barza, borsa, a purse, as from Sp. peluca to Fr. perruque. See Bulge.

To Burst. In OE. brest, brast. G. bersten, AS. berstan, byrstan, OHG. brestan, bristen, Sw. brista, ON. brjota, Fr. briser. Port. britar, to break. Gael. bris, brisd, break; brisdeach, bristeach, brittle. The root appears under the forms brik, bris, brist, brit. Lang. brico, briso, briketo, brizeto, a morsel, fragment; E. brist, small fragments. Compare also OE. brokil and brotil; brittle, and, as it is still pronounced in N. of England, brickle. Serv. prsnuti, to burst.

To Bury.—Burial. AS. byrgan, birgan, birigean, to bury; byrgen, byrgels, byrigels, a sepulchre, tomb, burial place. OHG. burgisli, a sepulchre; chreoburgium

(chreo, AS. hreaw, a corpse), a monument or erection over the dead. — Gloss. Malberg. The radical idea is seen in Goth. bairgan, AS. beorgan, to keep, preserve, protect; whence beorg, beorh, a rampart, defence, mount, a heap of stones, burial mound. 'Worhton mid stanum anne steapne beorh him ofer:' they raised a steep mound of stones over him. Thence byrigean, to bury, apparently a secondary verb, signifying to entomb, to sepulchre, and not directly (as Du. berghen, borghen, condere, abdere, occultare—K.) to hide in the ground.

Bush.—Bushel. The bush of a wheel is the metal lining of the nave or hollow box in which the axle works. Du. busse, a box, busken, a little box; Dan. basse, a box, a gun; G. büchse, a box, rad-büchse, Sw. hjul-bosse, the bush of a wheel; Sc. bush, box wood; to bush, to sheath, to enclose in a case or box. The Gr. πύξις, -ιδος, a box, gave Lat. pyxis as well as buxis, -idis, and thence Mid.Lat. buxida, bossida, buxta, boxta, bosta, Prov. boistia, boissa, OFr. boiste, with the diminutives, Mid.Lat. buxula, bustula, bustellus, bussellus, OFr. boistel, boisteau, Fr. boisseau, a box for measuring corn, a bushel. See Box.

Bush.—Busk. Sibriht that I of told, that the land had lorn That a swineherd slough under a busk of thorn. R. Brunne. The foregoing modes of spelling the word indicate a double origin, from the ON. buskr, a tuft of hair, bush, thicket (buski, a bunch of twigs, besom), and from the Fr. bousche, bouche, a wisp, tuft, whence bouchon, a tavern bush, boucher, to stop, to thrust in a bouche or tuft of hemp, tow, or the like. Bouchet, a bush, bramble. It has been shown under Boss that words signifying clump, tuft, cluster, are commonly derived from the idea of knocking. So from Fr. bousser, It. bussare, Du. bossen, buysschen, to knock, we have Fr. bosse, bousse, a hump, hunch; Du. bos, a bunch, knot, bundle; bosch (a diminutive ?), a tuft, then a tuft of trees, a grove; bosch van haer, a tuft of hair; —van wijnbesien, a bunch of grapes. Fris. bosc, a troop, lump, cluster; qualster-boscken, a clot of phlegm (Epkema). Du. bussel, a bundle; It. bossone, a bush, brake, thicket of thorns; Bret. bouch (Fr. ch), a tuft, wisp. G. bausch, projection, bulk, bunch, bundle, wisp; bauschen, bausen, to swell, bulge, bunch out.

BUSKIN Busk. The bone in a woman's stays. See Bust.

To Busk. To prepare, make ready, to dress, to direct one's course towards. They busked and maked them boun. Sir Tristram.

Jamieson thinks it probable that it may be traced to the ON. bua, to prepare, to dress, at bua sig, induere vestes; and it is singular that having come so near the mark he fails to observe that busk is a simple adoption of the deponent form of the ON. verb, at buast, for at buasc, contracted from the very expression quoted by him, 'at bua sik.' The primitive meaning of bua is simply to bend, whence at bua sik, to bend one's steps, to betake oneself, to bow, in OE. 'Haralldur kongur bidst austur um Eyðascog.' Harold the king busks eastwards through the forest of Eyda. 'Eptir thetta byr sik jarl sem skyndilegast ur landi.' After that the earl busks with all haste out of the land. Compare the meaning of busk in the following passage :— Many of the Danes privily were left And busked westwards for to robbe eft. R. Brunne. It is certain that buast must once have been written buasc, and we actually find truasc, fiasc, in the For Skirnis; barsc in Heimskringla, which would later have been written truast, fiast, barst. The frequency with which to busk is used, as synonymous with to make one boun, is thus accounted for, as boun is simply buinn, the past participle of the same verb bua, the deponent form of which is represented by the E. busk.

To bow was used in a similar manner for to bend one's steps, to turn. 'Boweth forth by a brook;' proceed by a brook. —P.P. Forth heo gunnen bugen In to Bruttaine And her ful sone To Ærthure comen.—Layamon, 2. 410. In the other copy— 'Forth hii gonne bouwe In to Brutaine.

* Buskin. Sp. borcegui, Ptg. borseguini, Fr. brodiquin. The primary sense seems to have been a kind of leather, probably Morocco leather. Thus Froissart, 'Le roy Richard mort, il fut couché sur une litiere, dedans un char couvert de brodequin tout noir.' The buskin is said by Cobarruvias to have been a fashion of the Moors and of Morocco, and he cites from an old romance 'Borzeguies Marroquies.' The word is explained by

Dozy from Arab. Xerqui, or Cherqui, a precious kind of leather made from sheepskins in the North of Africa. Edrisi, speaking of the costume of the King of Gana, says, 'he wears sandals of cherqui.' It is true that from hence to borzegui is a long step, but Dozy cites the Old Ptg. forms morsequill, mosequin, and supposes that the common Arab. prefix mu or mo has been erroneously added, as in moharra from harbe, the point of a lance, mogangas from gonj, love gestures, mohedaira from geidha, forest. Thus we should have mocherqui, and by transposition morchequi, morsequi, borcegui.

Buss. 1. A vessel employed in the herring fishery. Du. buyse, a vessel with a wide hull and blunt prow, also a flagon. ON. bussa, a ship of some size. Prov. bus, a boat or small vessel; Cat. buc, bulk, ship; Sp. bucha, a large chest or box, a fishing vessel. A particular application of the many-formed word signifying bulk, trunk, body, chest. See Boss, Box, Bulch, Bust.

2. A kiss. Sp. buz, a kiss of reverence. Sw. pussa, putta, Bav. bussen, Swiss butschen, to kiss (from the sound—Stalder); butschen, putschen, to knock; windbutsch, a stroke of wind. Comp. smack, a kiss, and also a sounding blow. On the other hand, Gael. bus, a mouth, lip, snout; Walach. buza, lip; Pol. buzia, mouth, lips, also a kiss. So Westerwald munds, mons, a kiss, from mund, mouth. Lat. basium. It. bacio, Sp. beso, Fr. baiser, a kiss. The two derivations would be reconciled if Gael. bus and Pol. buzia were themselves taken from the smacking sound of the lips.

Bust.—Busk. These seem to be modifications of the same word, originally signifying trunk of a tree, then trunk of the body, body without arms and legs, body of garment, especially of a woman's dress, and finally (in the case of busk) the whalebone or steel support with which the front of a woman's bodice is made stiff.

1. With respect to busk we have ON. bukr, trunk, body; Fr. busche, a log, a backstock, a great billet.—Cot.; Rouchi, busch, a bust, statue of the upper part of the body without arms; Fr. buc, busq, busque, a busk, plated body or other quilted thing, worn to make the body straight; buc, busc, bust, the long, small, or sharp-pointed and hard-quilted body of a doublet.—Cot. Wall. buc, trunk of a tree, of the human body (Grandg.).

2. With respect to bust; ON. butr, a log; Mid.Lat. busta, arbor ramis truncata—Gloss. Lindenbr. in Diez; Gris. bust, bist, trunk of a tree, body of a man, body of a woman's dress; It. busto, a bulk or trunk without a head, a sleeveless truss or doublet, also a busk.—Fl. The Prov. inserts an r after the initial b; bruc, brut, brusc, bust, body, as in ON. bruskr as well as buskr, a bush, tuft, wisp, Prov. brostia as well as bostia, a box. The form brust, corresponding to brut as brusc to bruc, would explain the G. brust, the breast, the trunk, box, or chest in which the vitals are contained. The ultimate origin may be found in the parallel forms buk, but, representing a blow. Pol. puk, knock, crack; Fr. buquer, Namur busquer (Sigart), Lang. buta, to knock. Swab. busch, a blow, a bunch of flowers; butz, a blow, a projection, stump, lump. From the figure of striking against we pass to the notion of a projection, stump, thick end, stem.

Bustard. A large bird of the gallinaceous order. Fr. outard. A great sluggish fowl.—B. Sp. abutarda, or avutarda; Champagne bistarde; Prov. austarda, Fr. outarde. It. ottarda. Named from its slowness of flight. 'Proximae iis sunt quas Hispania aves tardas appellat.'—Plin. 10. 22. Hence probably au-tarda, otarda, utarda, and then with avis again prefixed, as in avestruz (avis struthio), an ostrich, avutarda.—Diez. Port. abotarda, betarda.

To Bustle. To hurry or make a great stir.—B. Also written buskle. It is like the smouldering fire of Mount Chimæra, which boiling long time with great buskling in the bowels of the earth doth at length burst forth with violent rage.—A.D. 1555.—Hal. Here we see the word applied to the bubbling up of a boiling liquid, from which it is metaphorically applied in ordinary usage to action accompanied with 'a great stir.' ON. bustla, to make a splash in the water, to bustle. So in Fin. kupata, kupista, to rustle (parum strepo); käyn kupajain crepans ito, I go clattering about, inde discurro et operosus sum, I bustle.

Busy.—Business. AS. biseg, bisg, bisegung, bisgung, occupation, employment; bisgan, bysgian, Fris. bysgje, to occupy; Du. bezig, beezig, busy, occupied; bezigen, to make use of. Business can hardly be distinct from Fr. besoigne, besongne, work, business, an affair.—Cot. The proceedings of Parliament, A.D. 1372, speak of lawyers 'pursuant busoignes en la Court du Roi.' Perhaps besogne may be from a G. equivalent of AS. bisgung. But. As a conjunction but is in every case the compound be-out, Tooke's distinction between but, be out, and bot, moreover, to-boot, being wholly untenable. AS. butan, buta, bute, without, except, besides; butan æ, without law, an outlaw; butan wite, without punishment; butan wifum and cildum, besides women and children. Pl.D. buiten; buiten door, out of doors; buiten dat, besides that; Du. buiten, without; buiten-man, a stranger; buiten-sorgh, without care.

The cases in which Tooke would explain the conjunction as signifying boot, add, in addition, moreover, are those in which the word corresponds to the Fr. mais, and may all be reduced to the original sense of without, beyond the bounds of. Whatever is in addition to something else is beyond the bounds of the original object.

In Sc. we find ben, from AS. binnan, within, the precise correlative of but, without; but and ben, without the house and within; then applied to the outer and inner rooms of a house consisting of two apartments.

The rent of a room and a kitchen, or what in the language of the place is styled a but and a ben, gives at least two pounds sterling.—Account of Stirlingshire in Jamieson.

Ben-house, the principal apartment. The elliptical expression of but for only is well explained by Tooke. Where at the present day we should say, ' There is but one thing to be done,' there is really a negation to be supplied, the full expression being, ' there is nothing to be done but one thing,' or ' there is not but one thing to be done.' Thus Chaucer says, ' I n'am but a leude compilatour.— If that ye vouchsafe that in this place— That I may have not but my meat and drinke, where now we should write, ' I am but a compiler,' ' that I may have but my meat and drink.'

As an instance of what is called the adversative use of but, viz. that which would be translated by Fr. mais,—suppose a person in whom we have little trust has been promising to pay a debt, we say, ' But when will you pay it?' Here the but implies the existence of another point not included among those to which the debtor has adverted, viz. the time of payment. ' Besides all that, when will you pay?'

BUTT 'All the brethren are entertained bountifully, but Benjamin has a five-fold portion.' Here the but indicates that Benjamin, by the mode in which he is treated, is put in a class by himself, outside that in which his brethren are included.

Butcher. Fr. boucher, Prov. bochier, Lang. boquier, from boc, a goat (and not from bouche, the mouth), properly a slaughterer of goats; ' que en carieras publicas li boquiers el sanc dels bocs no jhieton, ni aveisson los bocs en las plassas'—that the butchers shall not cast the blood of the goats into the public ways, nor slaughter the goats in the streets.—Coutume d'Alost in Dict. Lang. So in Italian from becco, a goat, beccaro, beccaio, a butcher; beccaria, a butchery, slaughter-house. But It. boccino, young beef or veal flesh; bocciero, a butcher. Piedm. (children) boc, bocin, ox, calf.

Butler. Fr. bouteillier, as if from bouteille, a bottle, the servant in charge of the bottles, of the wine and drink. But the name must have arisen before the principal part of the drinkables would be kept in bottles, and the real origin of the word is probably from buttery. Butler, the officer in charge of the buttery or collection of casks, as Pantler, the officer in charge of the pantry. Buttery, from butt, a barrel; Sp. boteria, the store of barrels or wine skins in a ship.

Butt. A large barrel. It. Fr. botte, a cask. OFr. bous, bouz, bout, Sp. bota, a wine skin, a wooden cask. Sp. botija, an earthen jar; botilla, a small winebag, leathern bottle. The immediate origin of the term is probably butt in the sense of trunk or round stem of a tree, then hollow trunk, body of a man, belly, bag made of the entire skin of an animal, wooden receptacle for liquors. A similar development of meaning is seen in the case of E. trunk, the body of a tree or of a man, also a hollow vessel; G. rumpf, the body of an animal, hollow case, hull of a ship. The E. bulk was formerly applied to the trunk or body, and it is essentially the same word with Lat. bulga, belly, skin-bag, and with It. bolgia, a leathern bag, a budget. A similar train of thought is seen in ON. bolr, the trunk or body of an animal, bole of a tree, body of a shirt; W. bol, bola, the belly, rotundity of the body, bag. The Sp. barriga, the belly, is doubtless connected with barril, a barrel, earthen jug; and in E. we speak of the barrel of a horse to signify the round part of the body. Wall. bodine, belly, calf of the leg; bodé, rabodé, courtaud, trapu.—Grandg. Bav. boding, a barrel.—Schmell. From Grisons butt, a cask, is formed the augmentative buttatsch, the stomach of cattle, a large belly. The word body itself seems identical with G. bottich, a tub. The Bavarian potig, potacha, bottig, signify a cask or tub, while bottich, bodi', are used in the sense of body.
To Butt. To strike with the head like a goat or a ram. From the noise of a blow. To come full butt against a thing is to come upon it suddenly, so as to make a sounding blow. Du. bot, tout à coup; bot blijven staan, s'arrêter tout à coup.—Halma. Du. botten, to thrust, to push; It. botto, a blow, a stroke; di botto, suddenly; botta, a thrust; It. buttare, to cast, to throw; Lang. bata, to strike, to thrust; Fr. bouter, to thrust, to push; W. pwtiaw, to butt, poke, thrust.
The butt or butt end of a thing is the striking end, the thick end. A butt, ON. butr, the trunk, stump of a tree; Fr. bout, end; W. pwt, any short thick thing, stump. G. butt, butz, a short thick thing or person—Schmeller; Fr. botte, a bundle; Du. Fr. bot, thick, clumsy; pied-bot, a stump or club foot.—Cot. Gris. bott, a hill, hillock; botta, a blow, a boil, a clod. Fr. butte, a mound, a heap of earth; butter un arbre, to heap up earth round the roots of a tree; butter le céleris, to earth up celery; butter un mur, to support a wall beginning to bulge; butte, E. butt, a mound of turf in a field to support a target for the purpose of shooting at.
Fr. but, the prick in the middle of a target, a scope, aim; whence to make a butt of a person, to make him a mark for the jests of the company.
Fr. buter, to touch at the end, to abut or butt on, as in G. from stossen, to strike, to thrust; an etwas anstossen, to be contiguous to, to abut on. Hence the butts in a ploughed field are the strips at the edges of the field, or headlands upon which the furrows abut; but-lands, waste ground, buttals, a corner of ground.—Hal.
Butter. Lat. butyrum, Gr. βούτυρον, as if from βους, an ox, but this is probably a mere adaptation, and the true derivation seems preserved in the provincial German of the present day. Bav. buttern, butteln, to shake backwards and forwards, to boult flour. Butter-glass, a ribbed glass for shaking up salad sauce. Buttel-trüb, thick from shaking. Butter-schmalz, grease produced by churning, i. e. butter, as distinguished from gelassene schmalz, dripping, grease that sets by merely standing.—Schmell.
Butter-fly. So called from the excrement being supposed to resemble butter. Du. boter-schijte, boter-vliege, boter-vogel.—Kil.
Buttery. Sp. boteria, the store of wine in ships kept in botas or leather bags. So the buttery is the collection of drinkables in a house, what is kept in butts. See Butler.
Buttock. The large muscles of the seat or breech. From Du. bout, a bolt, or spike with a large head, then the thigh or leg of an animal, from the large knobbed head of the thigh-bone. Bout van het schouderblad, caput scapulæ: bout van 't been, femur, coxa, clunis.—Kil. Boutje, a little gigot, the thigh of a goose, fowl, &c. Hamele-bout, lams-bout, a leg of mutton, leg of lamb. A buttock of beef is called a but in the W. of E.—Hal.
Button. Fr. bouton, a button, bud, pimple, any small projection, from bouter, to push, thrust forwards, as rejeton, a rejected thing, from rejeter, nourrisson, a nursling, from nourrir, nourrissons, -ez, &c. So in English pimples were formerly called pushes. Gael. put, to push or thrust, putan, a button. It is remarkable that Chaucer, who in general comes so close to the Fr., always translates bouton, the rosebud, in the R. R. by bothum and not button. W. both, a boss, a nave; bothog, having a rotundity; botwm, a boss, a button.
Buttress. An erection built up as a support to a wall. Fr. bouter, to thrust; arc-boutant, a flying buttress, an arch built outside to support the side thrust of a stone roof. Mur-buttant, a wall buttress, a short thick wall built to rest against another which needs support; butter, to raise a mound of earth around the roots of a tree. Boutant, a buttress or shore post.—Cot.
Buttrice. A farrier's tool for paring horses' hoofs, used by resting the head against the farrier's chest and pushing the edge forwards. Perhaps corrupted from Fr. boutis, the rooting of a wild boar, the tool working forwards like the snout of a swine. Fr. bouter, to thrust, boutoir, a buttrice.
* Buxom. AS. bocsam, buhsom, obedient, from bugan, to bow, give way, submit; Fris. bocgsum, Du. geboogsaem. flexible, obedient, humble.—Kil.

For holy church hotheth all maner puple Under obedience to be and buxum to the lawe. P.P.
Buhsomnesse or boughsomeness. Pliableness or bowsomeness, to wit, humbly stooping or bowing down in sign of obedience.—Verstegan in R.
The sense of buxom, used in commendation of women, depends upon a train of thought which has become obsolete. To bow down the ear is to listen favourably to a petition. Hence bowing or bending was understood as symbolical of good will, and a bowed or crooked coin or other object was presented in order to typify the good will of the sender, or to conciliate that of the person to whom it was addressed.
He sent to him his servant secretly the night before his departure for Newbury with a bowed groat in token of his good heart towards him.— Foxes Martyrs, iii. 519. Also when she had bowed a piece of silver to a saint for the health of her child.—Ib. ii. 21. In N. & Q. Many good old people—of meere kindness gave me bowd sixpences and groats, blessing me with their hearty prayers and God speedes.—Kempe's nine days' wonder, p. 3, Bowable or bowsome (buxom) thus came to signify well inclined to, favourable, gracious.
Thou which barist the Lord make the patroun—for to be to us inclineable or bowable or redi to heere us.—Pecock Repressor, 200.
Mercy hight that mayde, a meke thynge with alle, A ful benygne buirde, and boxome of speche.—gracious of speech.—P. P. xviii. 116.
A buxom dame or lass is then a gracious, good-humoured one, and when the derivation of the word was forgotten it drew with it the sense of good health and spirits so naturally connected with good humour.
To Buy. AS. bycgan, bohte, OE. bygge, to purchase for money. 'Sellers and biggers:'—Wiclif. The two pronunciations were both current in the time of Chaucer, who makes abigg, to abie rhyme with rigg. See Abie.

Goth. bugjan, bauhta, to buy; frabug-jan, to sell.
To Buzz. To make a humming noise like bees. A direct imitation. Then applied to speaking low, indistinctly, confusedly. It. buzzicare, to whisper, to buzz.
Buzzard. A kind of hawk of little esteem in falconry. Lat. buteo; Fr. buso, busard; Prov. buzac, buzarg. It. bozzago, bozzagro, abozzago, a buzzard or puttock. The name is also given to a beetle, from the buzzing sound of its flight, and it is to be thus understood in the expression blind buzzard. We also say, as blind as a beetle, as Fr. étourdi comme un hanneton, as heedless as a cock-chafer, from the blind way in which they fly against one.
By. Goth. bi, AS. bi, big, G. bei, Du. bij, Sanscrit abhi (Dief). Too used a word to leave any expectation of an etymological explanation, but the senses may generally be reduced to the notion of side. To stand by is to stand aside ; to stand by one, to stand at his side ; a by-path is a side path ; to pass by, to pass at the side of. To swear by God is to swear in the sight of God, to swear with him by ; to adjure one by any inducement is to adjure him with that in view. When it indicates the agent it is because the agent is considered as standing by his work.
By-law. Originally the law of a particular town. Sw. bylag, from by, a borough, town having separate jurisdiction. ON. byar-log, Dan. bylove, leges urbanæ; ON. byar-rettr, jus municipii. Subsequently applied to the separate laws of any association.
Byre. A cow-house, stall. The ON. byr, bar, a town, village, farm, does not appear ever to have been used in the sense of a stall. The final r moreover is only the sign of the nominative, and would have been lost in E. as in Da., Sw. by.

Cabal. The Jews believed that Moses received in Sinai not only the law, but also certain unwritten principles of interpretation, called Cabala or Tradition, which were handed down from father to son, and in which mysterious and magical powers were supposed to reside.—Dict. Etym. Hence the name of caballing was applied to any secret machinations for effecting a purpose; and a cabal is a conclave of persons, secretly plotting together for their own ends.

Cabbage. From It. capo, OSp. cabo, head, come the Fr. caboche, a head (whence cabochard, heady, wilful), cabus, headed, round or great headed. Choux cabus, a headed cole or cabbage; laitue cabusse, lactuca capitata, headed or cabbage lettuce.—Cot. It. cabuccio, cappuccio, a cabbage; Du. cabuyskoole, brassica capitata.—Kil.

To Cabbage. To steal or pocket. Fr. cabas, Du. kabas, Sp. cabacho, a frail, or rush basket, whence Fr. cabasser, to put or pack up in a frail, to keep or hoard together.—Cot. Du. kabassen, convasare, surripere, suffurari, manticulari—Kil.; precisely in the sense of the E. cabbage.

Larron cabasseur de pecune.—Dict. Etym.

Cabin.—Cabinet. w. cab, caban, a booth or hut. It. capanna, Fr. cabane, a shed, hovel, hut. Tugurium, parva casa est quam faciunt sibi custodes vinearum ad tegimen sui. Hoc rustici capannam vocant.—Isidore in Diez. Item habeat archimacherus capanam (parvam cameram) in coquinâ ubi species aromaticas, &c., deponat : a store closet.—Neckam in Nat. Antiq. Cappa in OSp. signifies a mantle as well as a hut, and as we find the same radical syllable in Bohem. kabat, a tunic, kabane, a jacket ; Fr. gaban. It. cabarino, E. gabardine, a cloak of felt or shepherd's frock, it would seem fundamentally to signify shelter, covering. Mod.Gr. Κατράκι, a covering.

Cable. Ptg. calabre, cabre; Sp. cabre, cable; Fr. câble, OFr. caable, chaable.

The double a in the OFr. forms indicates the loss of the d extant in the Mid. Lat. cadabulum, cadabola, originally an engine of war for hurling large stones; and the Fr. chaable, Mid.Lat. cabulus, had the same signification ; ' une grande perière que l'on claime chaable.'—Duc.

Sed mox ingentia saxa Emittit cabulus.—Ibid.

From the sense of a projectile engine the designation was early transferred to the strong rope by which the strain of such an engine was exerted.

Concesserint—descarkagium sexaginta doliorum suis instrumentis, scilicet caablis et windasio tantum.—Duc. Didot.

Examples of the fuller form of cadable in the sense of cable are not given in the dictionaries, but it would seem to explain the ON. form kactal, a rope or cable. It is remarkable that the Esthon. has kabbel, a rope, string, band, and the Arab. 'habl, a rope, would correspond to cable, as Turk. havyar to caviare.

The Sp. and Ptg. cabo, a rope, is probably unconnected, signifying properly a rope's end, as the part by which the rope is commonly handled.

The name of the engine, cadabula, or cadable, as it must have stood in French, seems a further corruption of calabre (and not vice versâ, as Diez supposes), the Prov. name of the projectile engine, for the origin of which see Carabine, Capstan. We see an example of the opposite change in Champagne calabre for cadavre, a carcase.—Tarbe.

Cablisk. Brushwood—B., properly windfalls, wood broken and thrown down by the wind, in which sense are explained the OFr. caables, cables, cablis. The origin is the OFr. chaable, caable, an engine for casting stones, Mid.Lat. chadabula, cadabulum, whence Lang. chabla, to crush, overwhelm (Dict. Castr.), Fr. accabler, to hurl down, overwhelm, OFr. caable (in legal language), serious injury from violence without blood, Mid.Lat. cadabalum, prostratio ad terram.—Duc.

In like manner It. traboccare, to hurl down, from trabocco, an engine for casting stones; Mid.Lat. manganare, It. magagnare, OFr. méhaigner, E. maim, main, from manganum.

Cack. Very generally used, especially in children's language, for discharging the bowels, or as an interjection of disgust to hinder a child from touching anything dirty. Lang. cacai ! fi ! c'est du caca. Du. kack ! phi ! respuendi particula.—Kil. Common to Lat. and Gr., the Slavonian, Celtic, and Finnish languages. Gael. ceach ! exclamation of disgust ; cac, dung, dirt ; caca, nasty, dirty, vile. The origin is the exclamation ach ! ach ! made while straining at stool. Finn. akista, to strain in such a manner ; aak! like Fr. caca! vox puerilis detestandi immundum; aakka, stercus, sordes; aakkat'a, cacare. Swiss aa, agga, agge, dirty, disgusting ; agge machen (in nurses' language), cacare ; gaggi, gaggele, aeggi, stercus ; gatsch, filth. Gadge ! is provincially used in E. as an expression of disgust. Gr. κακός, bad.

To Cackle.—Gaggle. Imitative of the cry of hens, geese, &c. Sw. kakla, Fr. caqueter, Lith. kakaloti, to chatter, prattle ; Turk. kakulla, to cackle ; Du. kaeckelen ; Gr. κακκαζω.
Cadaverous. Lat. cadaver, a corpse, dead body.
Caddy. Tea-caddy, a tea-chest, from the Chinese catty, the weight of the small packets in which tea is made up.
* Cade. A pet lamb, one that is brought up by hand ; a petted child, one unduly indulged by, and troublesomely attached to, its mother.—Mrs B. The designation seems taken from the troublesome boldness and want of respect for man of the petted animal. ON. kátr, joyous ; Sw. dial. kát, frisky, unruly ; Dan. kaad, wanton, frolicsome ; kaad mund, a flippant tongue ; kaad dreng, a mischievous boy.—Atkinson.
Cadence. It. cadenza, a falling, a cadence, a low note.—Flo. Fr. cadence, a just falling, a proportionable time or even measure in any action or sound.—Cot. A chauntie cadence, ever and anon. It seems to be used in the sense of a certain mode of falling from one note to another, hence musical rhythm. Lat. cadere, to fall.
Cadet. Fr. cadet, Gascon capdet, the younger son of a family ; said to be from capitetum, little chief. Sp. cabdillo, lord, master.—Duc.
Cadger. See Kiddier.
Cage. Lat. cavea, a hollow place, hence a den, coop, cage. Sp. gavia. It. gabbia, gaggia, Fr. cage. Du. kauwe, kevie, G. käfig.
Caitiff. It. cattivo (from Lat. captivus), captive, a wretch, bad ; Fr. chétif, poor, wretched.
To Cajole. Fr. cageoler, caioler, to prattle or jangle like a jay (in a cage), to prate much to little purpose. Cajollerie, jangling, babbling, chattering.—Cot. The reference to the word cage hinted at by Cot. is probably delusive. It is more likely a word formed like cackle, gaggle, gabble, directly representing the chattering cries of birds. As Du. gabberen is identical with E. jabber, so gabble corresponds with Fr. javioler, to gabble, prate, or prattle.—Cot. From hence to cageoler is nearly the same step as from It. gabbia, to cage.
Cake. Sw. kaka, a cake or loaf. En kaka bröd, a loaf of bread. Dan. kage, Du. koeck, G. kuchen, N. kukje, cake.
Calamary. A cuttle-fish, from the ink-bag which it contains. Lat. calamus, Turk. Arab. kalem, a reed, reed-pen, pen ; Mod.Gr. καλαμάρι, an inkstand ; θαλασ-σίνην καλαμάρι, a sea inkstand, cuttle-fish.
Calamity. Lat. calamitas, loss, misfortune. Perhaps from w. coll, loss, whence Lat. incolumis, without loss, safe.
Calash.—Caloch. An open travelling chariot.—B. A hooded carriage, whence calash, a hood stiffened with whalebone for protecting a head-dress. Fr. calèche, It. calessa, Sp. calesa. Originally from a Slavonic source. Serv. kolo, a wheel, the pl. of which, kola, signifies a waggon. Pol. kolo, a circle, a wheel ; kolasa, a common cart, an ugly waggon ; kolaska, a calash ; Russ. kolo, kolesò, a wheel ; kolesnitza, a waggon ; kolyaska, kolyasochka, a calash. In the same way Fin. ratas, a wheel ; pl. rattaat (wheels), a car.
Calc-. Lat. calx, calcis, limestone, lime ; whence calcareous, of the nature of lime ; to calcine, to treat like lime, to burn in a kiln.
Calculate. Lat. calculo, to compute, from calculus, a small stone, a counter used in casting accounts.
Caldron.— Cauldron. Lat. calidus, hot ; caldarius, caldaria, Fr. chaudière. It. (in the augm. form) calderone, Fr. chaudron, cauldron, a vessel for heating water.
Calendar. Lat. calendarium, from calendæ, the first day of the month in Roman reckoning.
To Calender.—Fr. calendrer, to sleek or smooth linen cloth, &c.—Cot. Calandre, a roller, from Gr. κύλινδρος, Lat. cylindrus, a cylinder, roller.
Calenture. A disease of sailors from desire of land, when they are said to throw themselves into the sea, taking it for green fields. Sp. calentura, a fever, warmth ; calentar, to heat. Lat. calidus, hot.
Calf. The young of oxen and similar animals. G. kalb.
Calf of the Leg. ON. kalfi, Sw. ben-kalf, Gael. calpa, calba, or colpa na coise, the calf of the leg. The primary meaning of the word seems simply a lump. Calp is riadh, principal and interest, the lump and the increase. It is another form of the E. collop, a lump or large piece, especially of something soft. The calf of the leg is the collop of flesh belonging to that member. The Lat. analogue is pulpa ; pulpa cruris, the fleshy part of the leg ; pulpa ligni, Du. kalf van hout, the pith or soft part of wood. Dan. dial. kall, calf of leg, marrow, pith.
* Calibre.—Calliper. Fr. calibre. It. calibre, colibro, the bore of a cannon.

Calliper-compasses, compasses contrived to measure the diameter of the bore. Sp. calibre, diameter of a ball, of a column, of the bore of a firearm; met. quality. Ser de buen ò mal calibre, to be of a good or bad quality.
Derived by some from Arab. qâlab, kâlib, a last, form, or mould, which does not give a very satisfactory explanation either of the form or meaning of the word. Mahn derives it from Lat. quâ librâ, of what weight? a guess which should be supported by some evidence of the use of libra in the sense of weight. According to Jal (Gl. nautique), the Fr. form in the 16th century was équalibre.
Calico. Fr. calicot, cotton cloth, from Calicut in the E. Indies, whence it was first brought.
Caliph. The successors of Mahomet in the command of the empire. Turk. khalif, a successor.
* Caliver. A harquebus or handgun. The old etymologers supported their theories by very bold assertions, in which it is dangerous to place implicit faith. Sir John Smith in Grose, Mil. Antiq. i. 156 (quoted by Marsh), thus accounts for the origin of the word: 'It is supposed by many that the weapon called a caliver is another thing than a harquebuse, whereas in troth it is not, but is only a harquebuse, saving that it is of greater circuite or bullet than the other is; wherefore the Frenchman doth call it a pièce de calibre, which is as much as to say, a piece of bigger circuite.' But it is hard to suppose that E. caliver, or caliever, can be distinct from ODu. koluvre, klover, colubrina bombarda, sclopus.—Kil. Catapulta, donderbuchs—donrebusse vel clover.—Dief. Sup. Now these Du. forms are undoubtedly from Lat. coluber, Fr. couleuvre, an adder, whence couleuvrine, coulevrine, and E. culverin, a kind of cannon, and sometimes a handgun. Slange, serpens, coluber; also, bombarda longior, vulgo serpentina, colubrina, colubrum.—Kil. Coluvrine, licht stuk geschut, colubraria canna, fistula.—Biglotton. The adder or poisonous serpent was considered as a fire-spitting animal, and therefore it lent its name to several kinds of firearms. Among these were the drake (Bailey), and dragon, the latter of which has its memory preserved in Du. dragonder, E. dragoon, a soldier who originally carried that kind of arm.
To Calk. To drive tow or oakham, &c., into the seams of vessels to make them water-tight. Lat. calcare, to tread, to press or stuff. Prov. calca, calgua, Fr. cauque, a tent or piece of lint placed in the orifice of a wound, as the caulking in the cracks of a ship. Gael. calc, to calk, ram, drive, push violently; calcaich, to cram, calk, harden by pressure.
To Call. Gr. καλέω. ON. kalla, to call, to say, to affirm. Du. kal, prattle, chatter; kallen, to prattle, chatter. Lat. calare, to proclaim, to call. Probably from the sound of one hallooing, hollaing. Fin. hallottaa, alta voce ploro, ululo; Turk. kal, word of mouth; kil-u-kal, people's remarks, tittle-tattle. Heb. kol, voice, sound.
* Callet. A depreciatory term for a woman, a drab, trull, scold. 'A calat of leude demeaning.'—Chaucer. 'A callet of boundless tongue.'—Winter's Tale. Fr. caillette, femme frivole et babillarde.—Dict. Lang. Probably an unmeasured use of the tongue is the leading idea. NE. to callet, to rail or scold; calleting, pert, saucy, gossiping. 'They snap and callit like a couple of cur dogs.'—Whitby Gl. To call, to abuse; a good calling, a round of abuse.—Ibid.
Callous. Hard, brawny, having a thick skin.—B. Lat. callus, callum, skin hardened by labour, the hard surface of the ground. Fin. kallo, the scalp or skull, jää-kallo, a crust of ice over the roads (jää= ice).
Callow. Unfledged, not covered with feathers. Lat. calvus, AS. calo, caluw, Du. kael, kahrwe, bald.
Calm. It. Sp. calma, Fr. calme, absence of wind, quiet. The primitive meaning of the word, however, seems to be heat. Sp. dial. calma, the heat of the day.—Diez. Ptg. calma, heat, calmoso, hot. The origin is Gr. Καῦμα, heat, from Καίω, to burn. Mid.Lat. cauma, the heat of the sun. 'Dum ex nimio caumate lassus ad quandam declinaret umbram.' Cauma—incendium, calor, aestus.—Duc. The word was also written cawme in OE. The change from a u to an l in such a position is much less common than the converse, but many examples may be given. So It. oldire from audire, to hear, palmento for pavimento from pavimentum, Sc. chalmer for chawmer from chamber. The reference to heat is preserved in the It. scalmato, faint, overheated, overdone with heat—Alt.; scalmaccio, a sultry, faint, moist, or languishing drought and heat.—Fl. Thus the word came to be used mainly with a reference to the oppressive effects of heat, and gave rise to the Lang. caouma, chaouma, to avoid the heat, to take rest in the heat of the day, whence the Fr. chommer, to abstain from work. The Grisons cauma, a shady spot for cattle, a spot in which they take refuge from the heat of the day, would lead us to suppose that in expressing 'absence of wind' the notion of shelter may have been transferred from the sun's rays to the force of the wind. Or the word may have acquired that signification from the oppressiveness of the sun being mainly felt in the absence of wind.

Caloyer. A Greek monk. Mod.Gr. καλόγερος, kalógheros, monk, properly good old man, from καλὸς, good, and γέρων, aged.

Calumny. Lat. calumnia, a slander, false imputation.

Calvered Salmon. Properly calver salmon, the fish dressed as soon as it is caught, when its substance appears interspersed with white flakes like curd. From Sc. callour, callar, fresh. Calver of saumon, escume de saumon.—Palsgr. 'Take calver samon and seeth it in lewe water.'—Forme of Cury in Way. 'Quhen the salmondis faillis thair loup, thay fall callour in the said caldrounis and are than maist delitious to the mouth.'—Bellenden in Jam.

Calyx. Lat. calix, a cup, a goblet; calyx, the bud, cup, or hollow of a flower.

Cambering.—Cambrel. A ship's deck is said to lie cambering when it does not lie level, but is higher in the middle than at the ends.—B. Fr. cambrer, to bow, crook, arch; cambre, cambré, crooked, arched. Sp. combar, to bend, to warp, to jut. Bret. kamm, arched, crooked, lame. Gr. κάμπτω, to bend, καμπύλος, crooked, hooked. E. camber-nosed, having an aquiline nose.—Jam. Cambrel, cambren, or campren, crooked-stick, a crooked stick with notches in it on which butchers hang their meat.—B.

Cambric. A sort of fine linen cloth brought from Cambrai in Flanders.—B. Fr. Cambray, or toile de Cambray—Cambric.—Cot.

Camel. Gr. κάμηλος, Lat. camelus.

Cameo. It. cammeo, Fr. camée, camaieu, Sp. Ptg. camafeo, Mid.Lat. camahelus, camahutus.

Camisade. Sp. camisa, It. camiscia, a shirt, whence Fr. camisade. It. camiscia, a night attack upon the enemies' camp, the shirt being worn over the clothes to distinguish the attacking party, or rather perhaps a surprise of the enemy in their shirts.

Camlet. Fr. camelot. A stuff made of camel's or goat's hair. It was distinguished by a wavy or watered surface. Camelot a ondes, water camelot; camelot plenier, unwatered camelot; se cameloter, to grow rugged or full of wrinkles, to become waved like camelot.—Cot.

Camp.—Campaign.—Champaign. Lat. campus, It. campo, Fr. champ, a plain, field; It. campo, Fr. camp, a camp or temporary residence in the open field. From campus was formed Lat. campania, It. campagna, Fr. champagne, a field country, open and level ground, E. champaign. In a different application It. campagna, Fr. campagne, E. campaign, the space of time every year that an army continues in the field during a war.—B.

Canal.—Channel. Lat. canalis, a conduit-pipe, the bed of a stream, the fluting or furrow in a column; canna, a cane, the type of a hollow pipe.

Cancel. Lat. cancello, to make like a lattice, cross out by scoring across and across; cancelli, a lattice.

Cancer. See Canker.

Candid.—Candidate. Lat. candidus, white, fair, plain-dealing, frank and sincere: candidatus, clothed in white, whence the noun signifying an applicant, aspirant, because those aspiring to any principal office of State presented themselves in a white toga while soliciting the votes of the citizens.

Candle.—Chandelier. Lat. candela, Fr. chandelle, from candere, to glow.

Candy. Sugar in a state of crystallisation. Pers. Arab. Turk. kand, sugar. Sanscr. khanda, a piece, sugar in pieces or lumps; khand, to break.

Canibal. An eater of human flesh. From the Cannibals, or Caribs, or Galibis, the original inhabitants of the W. India Islands, the name being differently pronounced by different sections of the nation, some of whom, like the Chinese, had no r in their language. Peter Martyr, who died in 1526, calls them Cannibals or Caribees. 'The Caribes I learned to be men-eaters or cannibals, and great enemies to the inhabitants of Trinidad.—Hackluyt in R.'

Canine. Lat. canis, a dog.

Canister. Lat. canistrum, a basket.

Canker. Fr. chancre, an eating, spreading sore. Lat. cancer, a crab, also an eating sore.

Cann. ON. kanna, a large drinking vessel. Perhaps from W. *cannu*, to contain, as *rummer*, a drinking glass, from Dan. *rumme*, to contain. But it may be from a different source. Prov. *cane*, a reed, *cane*, also a measure. Fr. *cane*, a measure for cloth, being a yard or thereabouts; also a can or such-like measure for wine.—Cot. A joint of a hollow stalk would be one of the earliest vessels for holding liquids, as a reed would afford the readiest measure of length.
Cannel Coal. Coal burning with much bright flame, like a torch or candle. N. *kyndel, kynnel*, a torch.
Cannon. It. *cannone*, properly a large pipe, from *canna*, a reed, a tube. Prov. *canon*, a pipe.
Canoe. An Indian boat made of the hollowed trunk of a tree. Sp. *canoa*, from the native term. Yet it is remarkable that the G. has *kahn*, a boat. OFr. *cane*, a ship; *canot*, a small boat.—Diez.
Canon.—To Canonise. From Gr. *κάνη, κάννα*, a cane, was formed *κανών*, a straight rod, a ruler, and met. a rule or standard of excellence. Hence Lat. *canon* was used by the ecclesiastical writers for a tried or authorised list or roll. The *canon* of scriptures is the tried roll of sacred writers. To canonise, to put upon the tried list of saints.
Again we have Lat. *canonicus*, regular, *canonici*, the canons or regular clergy of a cathedral.
Canopy. Mod.Gr. *κωνωπεῖον*, a mosquito curtain, bed curtain, from *κωνώψ*, a gnat.
Cant. Cant is properly the language spoken by thieves and beggars among themselves, when they do not wish to be understood by bystanders. It therefore cannot be derived from the sing-song or whining tone in which they demand alms. The word seems to be taken from Gael. *cainnt*, speech, language, applied in the first instance to the special language of rogues and beggars, and subsequently to the peculiar terms used by any other profession or community.
The Doctor here, When he discourseth of dissection, Of vena cava and of vena porta, The meseræum and the mesentericum, What does he else but cant? or if he run To his judicial astrology.
And trowl the trine, the quartile, and the sex-tile, &c. Does he not cant? who here can understand him?
B. Jonson.
Gael. *can*, to sing, say, name, call.
Canteen. It. *cantina*, a wine-cellar or vault.

Canter. A slow gallop, formerly called a Canterbury gallop. If the word had been from *cantherius*, a gelding, it would have been found in the continental languages, which is not the case.
Cantle. A piece of anything, as a *cantle* of bread, cheese, &c.—B. Fr. *chantel, chanteau*, Picard. *canteau*, a corner-piece or piece broken off the corner, and hence a gobbet, lump, or *cantell* of bread, &c.—Cot. Du. *kandt-broodts*, a hunch of bread.—Kil. ON. *kantr*, a side, border; Dan. *kant*, edge, border, region, quarter; It. *canto*, side, part, quarter, corner. A *cantle* then is a corner of a thing, the part easiest broken off.
Fin. *kanta*, the heel, thence anything projecting or cornered; *kuun-kanta*, a horn of the moon; *leiwan kanta, margo panis diffracta*, a *cantle* of bread. Esthon. *kän, kand*, the heel.
Canton. Fr. *canton*. It. *cantone*, a division of a country. Probably only the augmentative of *canto*, a corner, although it has been supposed to be the equivalent of the E. territorial hundred, W. *cantref, cantred*, from *cant*, a hundred, and *tref*, hamlet.
Canvas. From Lat. *cannabis*, hemp. It. *cannevo, canapa*, hemp, *cannevaccia, canapaccia*, coarse hemp, coarse hempen cloth; Fr. *canevas*, canvas. To *canvas* a matter is a metaphor taken from sifting a substance through canvas, and the verb *sift* itself is used in like manner for examining a matter thoroughly to the very grounds.
Cap.—Cape.—Cope. AS. *cappe*, a cap, cape, cope, hood. Sp. *capa*, a cloak, coat, cover; It. *cappa*, Fr. *chape*. Words beginning with *fl* or *ch* are frequently accompanied by synonymous forms in which the *f* is omitted, and probably the origin of the present words may be found in the notion of a piece of something flat clapped on another surface like the flap of a garment turned back upon itself. Flappe of a gowne, *cappe*.—Palsgr. See Chape.
Swab. *schlapp, hirnschlapple*, a scull-cap. Gugel, *capello Italis, Germanis kappen, Alamannis, schlappen*.—Goldast in Schmid. Schwab. Wtb.
The root *cap*, signifying cover, is found in languages of very different stocks.
Mod.Gr. *καππάκι*, a cover; Turk. *kapa-mak*, to shut, close, cover; *kapi*, a door; *kaput*, a cloak; *kapali*, shut, covered.
Capable.—Capacious. It. *capevole, capace*, Lat. *capax*, able to receive, contain, or hold. See Capt-.
Caparison. Sp. *caparazon*, carcase of a fowl, cover of a saddle, of a coach, or other things.
Cape. A headland. It. capo, a head. See Chief.
Caper. To caper or cut capers is to make leaps like a kid or goat. It. capro, a buck, from Lat. caper ; caprio, capriola, a capriol, a chevret, a young kid ; met. a capriol or caper in dancing, a leap that cunning riders teach their horses.—Fl. Fr. capriole, a caper in dancing, also the capriole, sault, or goat's leap (done by a horse).—Cot.
Capers. A shrub. Lat. capparis, Fr. câpre, Sp. alcaparra, Arab. algabr.
Capillary. Hair-like. Lat. capillus, a hair.
Capital. Lat. capitalis, belonging to the head, principal, chief. From caput, the head. Hence capitalis the sum lent, the principal part of the debt, as distinguished from the interest accruing upon it. Then funds or store of wealth viewed as the means of earning profit.
To Capitulate. Lat. capitulare, to treat upon terms ; from capitulum, a little head, a separate division of a matter.
Capon. A castrated cock. Sp. capar, to castrate. Mod.Gr. ἀποκόπτω, to cut off, abridge ; ἀπόκοπος, cut, castrated.
Caprice. It. cappriccio, explained by Diez from capra, a goat, for which he cites the Comask nucia, a kid, and nucc, caprice ; It. ticchio, caprice, and OHG. ziki, kid. The true derivation lies in a different direction. The connection between sound and the movement of the sonorous medium is so apparent, that the terms expressing modifications of the one are frequently transferred to the other subject. Thus we speak of sound vibrating in the ears ; of a tremulous sound, for one in which there is a quick succession of varying impressions on the ear. The words by which we represent a sound of such a nature are then applied to signify trembling or shivering action. To twitter is used in the first instance of the chirping of birds, and then of nervous tremulousness of the bodily frame. To chitter is both to chirp and to shiver.—Hal. It is probable that Gr. φρίσσω originally signified to rustle, as Fr. frisser (frissement d'un trait, the whizzing of an arrow— Cot.), then to be in a state of vibration, to ruffle the surface of water, or, as Fr. frissonner, to shudder, the hair to stand on end. φρίσος, bristling, curling, because the same condition of the nerves which produces shivering also causes the hair to stand on end. The same imitation of CAPRICE a rustling, twittering, crackling sound gives rise to Sc. brissle, birsle, to broil, to parch, Lang. brezilia, to twitter as birds, Genevese bresoler, brisoler, to broil, to tingle (l'os qui bresole, the singing-bone). It. brisciare, to shiver for cold, and with an initial gr instead of br, Fr. greziller, to crackle, wriggle, frizzle, grisser, to crackle. It. gricciare, to chill and chatter with one's teeth, aggricciare, to astonish and affright and make one's hair stand on end. In Lat. ericius, a hedge-hog. It. riccio, hedge-hog, prickly husk of chestnut, curl, Fr. rissoler, to fry, hérisser, It. arricciarsi, the hair to stand on end, the initial mute of forms like Gr. φρῖκος, It. brisciare, gricciare, is either wholly lost, or represented by the syllable e, hé, as in Lat. erica, compared with Bret. brug, W. grug, heath, or Lat. eruca compared with It. bruco, a caterpillar.
We then find the symptoms of shivering, chattering of the teeth, roughening of the skin, hair-standing on end, employed to express a passionate longing for a thing, as in Sophocles' ἐφρίξ' ἔρωτι, I have shivered with love. 'A tumult of delight invaded his soul, and his body bristled with joy'—Vikram, p. 75, where Burton adds in a note. Unexpected pleasure, according to the Hindoos, gives a bristly elevation to the down of the body. The effect of eager expectation in producing such a bodily affection may frequently be observed in a dog waiting for a morsel of what his master is eating. So we speak of thrilling with emotion or desire, and this symptomatic shuddering seems the primary meaning of earn or yearn, to desire earnestly. To earne within is translated by Sherwood by frissonner ; to yearne, s'hérisser, frissonner ; a yearning through sudden fear, hérissonnement, horripilation. And similarly to yearn, arricciarsi.—Torriano. Many words signifying originally to crackle or rustle, then to shiver or shudder, are in like manner used metaphorically in the sense of eager desire, as Fr. grisser, greziller, griller, brisoler ; ' Elles grissoient d'ardeur de le voir, they longed extremely to see it.'—Cot. ' Griller d'impatience.'—Trev. ' Il bresole (Gl. Gé-nèv.)—grezille (Supp. Acad.) d'être marié.' The It. brisciare, to shiver, gives rise to brezza, shivering, ribrezzo, a chillness, shivering, horror, and also a skittish or humorous toy, ribrezzoso, humorous, fantastical, suddenly angry.—Fl. So from Sw. knus, bristling, curly, knus-hufwud

(bristly-head), one odd, fantastic, hard to please.—Nordfoss. Du. krul, a caprice, fancy. The exact counterpart to this is It. arriccia-capo (Fl.), or the synonymous capriccio (capo-riccio), a shivering fit (Altieri), and tropically, a sudden fear apprehended, a fantastical humour, a humorous conceit making one's hair to stand on end.—Fl. Fr. caprice, a sudden will, desire, or purpose to do a thing for which one has no apparent reason.—Cot.
Capriole. See Caper.
Capstan.—Capstern.—Crab. Sp. cabrestante, cabestrante; Fr. cabestan. The name of the goat was given in many languages (probably for the reason explained under Carabine) to an engine for throwing stones, and was subsequently applied to a machine for raising heavy weights or exerting a heavy pull. OSp. cabra, cabreia, an engine for throwing stones. It. capra, a skid or such engine to raise or mount great ordnance withal; also tressels, also a kind of rack.—Fl. G. bock, a trestle, a windlass, a crab or instrument to wind up weights, a kind of torture.—Küttner. Fr. chevre, a machine for raising heavy weights. In the S. of France the transposition of the r converts capra into crabo, a she-goat, also a windlass for raising heavy weights (explaining the origin of E. crab s.s.), a sawing-block or trestles.—Dict. Castr.
The meaning of the Sp. cabrestante (whence E. capstern or capstan) now becomes apparent. It is a standing crab, a windlass set upright for the purpose of enabling a large number of men to work at it, in opposition to the ordinary modification of the machine, where it is more convenient to make the axis horizontal.
Capsule. Lat. capsula, dim. of capsa, a coffer, box, case.
Capt-. -cept. -ceive. Lat. capio, captus, to take, seize, hold, contain, whence capture, captive, captivate, &c. The a of capio changes to an i in composition, and of captus to an e, as in accipio, acceptus, to take to, to accept; recipio, receptus, to take back, to receive; receptio, a taking back, a reception. But in passing into Spanish the radical syllable -cip- of these compound verbs, recipere, concipere, &c., was converted into -ceb- or -cib-, and in French into -cev-; as in Sp. recibir, concebir, Fr. recevoir, concevoir. Passing on into E., which has received by far the greater part of its Latin derivatives through the French, the -cev- of the Fr. verbs gives rise to the element -ceive in receive, conceive, perceive, deceive.
The participial form of the root in compound verbs, -cept, did not suffer the same corruption in French, and has thus descended unaltered to English, where it forms a very large class of compounds, accept, except, precept, intercept, deception, conception, &c. In cases, however, where the -cept was final or was only followed by an e mute, the p was commonly not pronounced in French, as in OFr. concept, recepte, decepte, and has accordingly been lost in E. conceit, deceit, while it still keeps its ground in the writing of receipt although wholly unpronounced.
Captain. It. capitano, a head man, commander, from Lat. caput, capitis, head.
Capuchin. It. capuccio, cappuccio, a hood (dim. di cappa, a cloke); capuccino, a hooded friar, a capuchin.
Car.—Cart.—Carry. Lat. carrus. It. carro, Fr. char. In all probability from the creaking of the wheels. ON. karra, Du. karren, kerren, to creak, also to carry on a car; karrende waegen, a creaking waggon. Fin. karista, strideo, crepo. Sp. chirriar, to creak, chirrion, a tumbrel or strong dung-cart which creaks very loudly.—Neumann. Derivatives are Fr. charrier, to carry; It. caricare, Fr. charger, to load; It. carretta, Fr. charret, a cart.
Carabine.—Carbine. The It. calabrin, Fr. calabrin, carabin, was a kind of horse soldier, latterly, at least, a horseman armed with a carbine or arquebus. Carabin, a carbine or curbeene; an arquebuzier armed with a murrian and breast-plate and serving on horseback.—Cot.
Les carabins sont des arquebusiers à cheval qui vont devant les compagnies des gens de guerre comme pour reconnaitre les ennemis et les escarmoucher.—Caseneuve in Dict. Etym.
As the soldiers would naturally be named from their peculiar armament, it is inferred by Diez with great probability that the term calabre, originally signifying a catapult or machine for casting stones, was transferred on the invention of gunpowder to a firelock, and that the calabrins or carabins were named from carrying a weapon of that designation, as the dragoons (Du. dragonder) from carrying the gun called a dragon. It was natural that the names of the old siege machines for casting stones should be transferred to the more efficient kinds of ordnance brought into use on the discovery of gunpowder. Thus the musket, It. moschetta, was originally a missile discharged from some kind of spring ma-chine. Ptg. espingarda, a firelock, is the ancient springald, a machine for casting large darts, and catapulta, properly a siege machine, is the word used in mo-dern Lat. for a gun.
The term calibre as the name of a pro-jectile engine is probably a corruption of cabre from cabra, a goat, in the same way that the Sp. calambre has been formed from the same source with the synon-ymous E. cramp. Ptg. cabre and calibre are both used in the sense of a cable, an instrument for exerting a heavy strain.
The reason why the name of the goat is used to designate a machine for cast-ing stones is probably that the term was first applied to a battering-ram (G. bock, a he-goat, a battering-ram), a machine named by the most obvious analogy after the goat and ram, whose mode of attack is to rush violently with their heads against their opponent. From the bat-tering-ram, the earliest instrument of mural attack, the name might naturally be transferred to the more complicated military engines made for hurling stones, from whence it seems to have descended to the harmless crabs and cranes of our mercantile times, designated in the case of G. bock and Fr. chèvre by the name of the goat. Sp. cabra, cabreia, cabrita, an engine for hurling stones, a crane.—Neu-mann.

Caracol. The half turn which a horse-man makes to the right or left; also a winding staircase. Sp. caracol, a snail, a winding staircase, turn of a horse. Gael. car, a twist, bend, winding; carach, winding, turning. AS. cerran, to turn.

Carat. Gr. κεράτιον, Venet. carate, seed of carob. Arab. kirat, Sp. quilato, a small weight. Fr. silique, the husk or cod of beans, &c., and particularly the carob or carob bean-cod; also a poise among physicians, &c., coming to four grains. Carrob, the carob bean, also a small weight, among mint-men and gold-smiths making the 24th of an ounce.—Cot.

Caravan. Pers. kerwan.

Caravel. It. caravela, a kind of ship. Mod.Gr. καράβι, Gael. carbh, a ship. Fr. carabe, a corracle or skiff of osier covered with skin.—Cot. See Carpenter.

Carbonaceous. — Carbuncle. Lat. carbo, a burning coal, charcoal; carbun-culus (dim. of carbo), a gem resembling a live coal, also (as Gr. ἄνθραξ, of the same primary meaning) a malignant ulcer, the suppuration of which seems to be re-garded as internal burning. Comp. OHG. eit, fire; eitar, matter, poison; eiz, an ulcer.

Carboy. A large glass bottle cased in wicker for holding vitriol. Derived in the first edition from Mod.Gr. καραμπόγια (caraboyia), vitriol, copperas. But Mr Marsh points out that the Gr. word is only an adoption of the Turk. karà boyà, black dye, and is applied exclusively to copperas or green vitriol, a solid body which could never have been packed in bottles, and so could not have given its name to the carboy. There is no doubt that the name comes from the East. Thus Kæmpfer (Amœn. Exot. p. 379) de-scribes vessels for containing wine made at Shiraz, 'Vasa vitrea, alia sunt majora, ampullacea et circumdato scirpo tunicata, quæ vocant karabâ.' From the same source are Sicil. carabba, a bottle with big belly and narrow neck; It. caraffa, Sp. garafa, Fr. caraffe, decanter, wine-bottle.

Carcase. Mod.Gr. καρκασι, a quiver, carcase;—τοῦ ἀνθρωπίνου σώματος, the skeleton;—τῆς χελώνης, the shell of a tor-toise. It. carcasso, a quiver, the core of fruit; car came, a dead carcase, skeleton, carcanet. Fr. carquasse, the dead body of any creature, a pelt or dead bird to take down a hawk withal; carquois, a quiver; carquan, a collar or chain for the neck.—Cot. Sp. Carcax, a quiver; car-casa, a skeleton. Cat. carcanada, the carcase of a fowl. The radical meaning seems to be something holding together, confining, constraining; shell, case, or framework. W. carch, restraint; Gael. carcair, a coffer, a prison. Bohem. krciti, to draw in, contract.
The word is explained by Diez from carnis capsa, the case of the flesh. It. cassa, a case or chest; casso, the trunk or chest of the body; Parmesan cassiron, skeleton.

Card. I. An implement for dressing wool. Lat. carere, carminare, to comb wool; carduus, a thistle. It. cardo, a this-tle, teasel for dressing woollen cloth. Lith. karszti, to ripple flax, to strip off the heads by drawing the flax through a comb, to card wool, to curry horses; karsztuwas, a ripple for flax, wool card, curry-comb. Gael. card, to card wool, &c., càrlag, a lock of wool; carta, a wool card. The fundamental idea is the no-tion of scraping or scratching, and the expression arises from an imitation of the noise. ON. karra, to creak, to hiss (as geese), to comb; karri, a card or comb; karr-kambar, wool cards. G. scharren, to scrape; kratzen, to scratch.
Card, 2.—Cartel.—Chart.—Charter. Lat. charta (Gr. χάρτης) paper, paper written on or the writing itself, whence the several meanings of the words above: Fr. carte, a card, charte, chartre, a deed, record.
Cardinal. From Lat. cardo, cardinis, a hinge, that on which the matter hinges, principal, fundamental. Gael. car, a turn, winding.
Care. AS. cearian, carian, to take heed, care, be anxious. Goth. kara, care; unkarja, careless; gakaran, to take care of.
Probably the origin of the word is the act of moaning, murmuring, or grumbling at what is felt as grievous. Fin. karista, raucâ voce loquor vel ravum sonum edo, strideo, morosus sum, murren, zanken; karry, asper, morosus, rixosus. A like connection may be seen between Fin. sur-rata, stridere, to whirr (schnurren), and suru, sorrow, care; ON. kumra, to growl, mutter, and G. kummer, grief, sorrow, distress; Fin. murista, murahtaa, to growl, and murhet, ægritudo animi, mœ-ror, cura intenta. The Lat. cura may be compared with Fin. kurista, voce strepo stridente, inde murmuro vel ægre fero, quirito ut infans.
To Careen. To refit a ship by bring-ing her down on one side and supporting her while she is repaired on the other. Properly, to clean the bottom of the ship. It. carena, the keel, bottom, or whole bulk of a ship; dare la carena alle navi, to tallow or calk the bottom of a ship. Carenare, Fr. carener, from Lat. carina, the keel of a vessel. Venet. carena, the hull of a ship, from the keel to the water line; essere in carena, to lie on its side.—Boerio.
Career. It. carriera, Fr. carrière, a highway, road, or street, also a career on horseback, place for exercise on horse-back.—Cot. Properly a car-road, from carrus.—Diez.
Caress. Fr. caresse. It. carezza, an endearment. W. caru, Bret. karout, to love. Bret. karantez, love, affection, ca-ress. Mid.Lat. caritia, from carus, dear. Et quum Punzilupus intrasset domum ubi es-sent hæretici, videntibus omnibus fecit magnas caritas et ostendit magnam amicitiam et famili-aritatem dictis hæreticis.—Mur. in Carp.
Carfax. A place where four roads meet. Mid.Lat. quadrifurcum from qua-tuor furcæ (Burguy), as quadrivium from quatuor viæ. OFr. carrefourg, quarre-four, the part of a town where four streets meet at a head.—Cot.
A l'entree de Luxembourg Lieu n'y avoit ni carrefourg Dont l'en n'eust veu venir les gens.
Rom. de Parthenay.
Translated in MS. Trin. Coll., No place there had, neither carfoukes none But peple shold se ther come many one.
W. W. Skeat, in N. & Q., Sept. 8, 1866.
' Thei enbusshed hem agein a carfowgh of six weyes.'—Merlin, p. 273.
Cargo. Sp. cargo, the load of a ship. It. caricare, carcare, Sp. cargar, Ptg. car-regar, Fr. charger, to load. From carrus, whence carricare, to load, in St Jerome.—Duc.
Caricature. It. caricatura, an over-loaded representation of anything, from caricare, to load.
Cark. AS. cearig, sollicitus; OSax. mod-carag, mæstus. OHG. charag, charg, carch, astutus. G. karg, Dan. karrig, stingy, niggardly; ON. kargr, tenax, piger, ignarus. W. carcus, solicitous.
Carl. A clown or churl. AS. ceorl, ON. karl, a man, male person.
Carlings.—Carled peas. Peas steep-ed and fried, G. kroll-erbser. Fr. graller, to parch, grollé, parched or carled, as peas, beans, &c.—Cot. Groler, to fry or broil.—Roquef. Champ. guerlir, to fry, from the crackling sound; Fr. croller, to murmur—Roquef.; croler, to shake, tremble, quaver; Bois crolant d'un ladre, a lazar's clack, E. crawl, crowl, to rumble.
Carminative. A medical term from the old theory of humours. The object of carminatives is to expel wind, but the theory is that they dilute and relax the gross humours from whence the wind arises, combing them out like the knots in wool. It. carminare, to card wool, also by medicines to make gross humours fine and thin.—Fl. For the root of carminare, see Garble, and compare Bret. kribina, to comb flax or hemp, as carminare, to comb wool.
Carnage.—Carnal.—Charnel. Lat. caro, carnis, the flesh of animals; carna-lis, appertaining to the flesh. Fr. charnel, carnal, sensual, charneux, fleshy; charn-age, the time during which it is lawful to Rom. Cath. to eat flesh.
Carnaval. The period of festivities indulged in in Catholic countries, imme-diately before the long fast of Lent. It. carnavale, carnovale, carnasciale, Fare-well flesh, that is to say, Shrove tide.—Fl. This however is one of those accommodations so frequently modifying the form of words. The true derivation is seen in Mid.Lat. carnelevamen or carnis levamen, i. e. the solace of the flesh or of the bodily appetite, permitted in anticipation of the long fast. In a MS. description of the Carnival of the beginning of the 13th century, quoted by Carpentier, it is spoken of as 'delectatio nostri corporis.' The name then appears under the corrupted forms of Carnelevarium, Carnelevale, Carnevale. 'In Dominica in caput Quadragesimae quae dicitur Carnelevale.'—Ordo Eccles. Mediol. A.D. 1130, in Carp. Other names of the season were Carnicapium, Shrove Tuesday, and Carnem laxare (It. carnelascia), whence the form carnasciale, differing about as much from its parent carnelascia as carnaval from carnelevamen.

Carol. Properly a round dance, Fr. Carole, querole. Bret. koroll, a dance, W. coroli, to reel, to dance.
Tho mightist thou karollis sene And folke daunce and merie ben, And made many a faire tourning Upon the grene grasse springing.—R. R. 760.

Chanson de carole, a song accompanying a dance; then, as Fr. balade from It. ballare, to dance, applied to the song itself. Diez suggests chorulus from chorus as the origin. But we have no occasion to invent a diminutive, as the Lat. corolla from corona gives the exact sense required. Robert of Brunne calls the circuit of Druidical stones a carol.
This Bretons renged about the felde The karole of the stones behelde, Many tyme yede tham about, Biheld within, biheld without.—Pref. cxciv.

Carouse. The derivation from kroes, a drinking cup, is erroneous, and there is no doubt that the old explanation from G. gar aus! all out! is correct. 'The custom,' says Motley (United Neth. 2. 94), 'was then prevalent at banquets for the revellers to pledge each other in rotation, each draining a great cup and exacting the same feat from his neighbour, who then emptied his goblet as a challenge to his next comrade.' When the goblet was emptied it probably would be turned upside down with the exclamation gar aus! This was what was called drinking carouse.
The tippling sots, at midnight which To quaff carouse do use, Will hate thee if at any time To pledge them thou refuse,—Drant in R.
Sp. carduz, cardos, act of drinking a full bumper to one's health.—Neum. 'Ein narr schüttet sein herz gar aus:' a fool empties his heart completely out. 'Some of our captains garoused of his wine till they were reasonably pliant—And are themselves at their meetings and feasts the greatest garousers and drunkards in existence.'—Raleigh, Discov. of Guiana, cited by Marsh.
The derivation is made completely certain by the use of all out in the same sense. I quaught, I drink all out, Je bois d'autant.—Palsgr. Alluz (G. all aus), all out, or a carouse fully drunk up.—Cot. Rabelais uses boire carrous et alluz.
Why give's some wine then, this will fit us all: Here's to you still my captains friend. All out!
B. and F. Beggars Bush.

To Carp. 1. Carpyn or talkyn, fabulor, confabulor, garrulo.—Pr. Pm.
So gone they forthe, carpende fast On this, on that.—Gower in Way.
Bohem. krapati, garrire, to chatter; krapanj, tattle, chatter. ON. skraf, discourse, chatter; skrafa, to rustle, to talk. Analogous to E. chirp.
2. Lat. carpo, to gather, pluck, pluck at, to find fault with.

Carpenter. Lat. carpentum, a car; carpentarius, a wheelwright, maker of waggons; It. carpenticre, a wheelwright, worker in timber; Fr. charpentier, as E. carpenter only in the latter sense. Mid. Lat. carpenta, zimmer, tymmer, zimmer-span.—Dief. Sup. The word seems of Celtic origin. Gael. carbh, a plank, ship, chariot; carbad, Olr. carpat (Stokes), a chariot, litter, bier.

Carpet. From Lat. carpere, to pluck, to pull asunder, was formed Mid.Lat. carpia, carpita, linteum carptum quod vulneribus inditur. Fr. charpie, lint. Mid.Lat. carpetrix; a carder.—Nomin. in Nat. Ant. 216. The term was with equal propriety applied to flocks of wool, used for stuffing mattresses, or loose as a couch without further preparation. 'Carpitam habeat in lecto, qui sacco, culcitra, vel coopertorio carebit.'—Reg. Templariorum in Duc.
It seems then to have signified any quilted fabric, a patchwork table-cover with a lining of coarse cloth—La Crusca, or the cloak of the Carmelites made of like materials; a woman's petticoat, properly doubtless a quilted petticoat. Carpeta, gonna, gonnella.—Patriarchi. 'Quilibet frater habeat saccum in quo dormit, carpetam (a quilt?), linteamen.'—Stat. Eq. Teut. in Duc. On the other hand we find the signification transferred from the flocks with which the bed was stuffed to the sacking which contained them. Rouchi carpéte, coarse loose fabric of wool and hemp, packing cloth. ' Eune tapisserie d'carpéte, des rideaux d'carpéte.' —Hécart.
Carriage. The carrying of anything, also a conveyance with springs for con-veying passengers. In the latter sense the word is a corruption of the OE. ca-roche, caroach, from It. carroccio, carroc-cia, carrozza; Rouchi caroche, Fr. car-rosse, augmentatives of carro, a car. It. carreaggio, carriaggio, all manner of carts or carriage by carts, also the car-riage, luggage, bag and baggage of a camp.—Fl.
Carrion. It. carogna, Fr. charogne, Rouchi carone, an augmentative from Lat. caro.
Carrot. Lat. carota.
To Carry. Fr. charrier, Rouchi carier, properly to convey in a car. Walach. carà, to convey in a cart, to bear or carry.
Cart. AS. krat. It. carretto, carretta. Fr. charrette, dim. of carro, a car.
Cartel. It. cartella, pasteboard, a piece of pasteboard with some inscription on it, hung up in some place and to be removed.—Flor. Hence a challenge openly hung up, afterwards any written challenge. See Card.
Cartilage. Lat. cartilago, gristle, tendon. Probably, like all the names of gristle, from the sound it makes when bitten. Alban. kertselig I cranch with the teeth. See Gristle.
Cartoon. Preparatory drawing of a subject for a picture. It. cartone, augm. of carta, paper.
Cartouch. — Cartoose. — Cartridge. Fr. cartouche. It. cartoccio, a paper case, coffin of paper for groceries, paper cap for criminals ignominiously exposed.—Fl. The paper case containing the charge of a gun.
To Carve. AS. ceorfan, Du. kerven, to cut or carve; G. kerben, to notch. Lith. kerpu, kirpti, to shear, cut with scissors.
Cascade. It. cascata, Fr. cascade, a fall of water, from It. cascare, to fall. The radical sense of the word seems to be to come down with a squash. Sp. cascar, to crack, crush, break to pieces. OE. quash, to dash.
Case.—Casual.—Casuist. Lat. casus, a fall, an act of falling, a chance or acci-dent, something that actually occurs, a form into which a noun falls in the pro-cess of declension; casualis, fortuitous, Fr. casuel; Fr. casuiste, one who reasons on cases put.

Case. It. cassa, Sp. caxa, Fr. caisse, a chest, coffer, case, from Lat. capsa (Diez), and that apparently from capio, to hold.
Case-mate. Fr. case-mate; Sp. casa-mata; It. casa-matta. Originally a loop-holed gallery excavated in a bastion, from whence the garrison could do exe-cution upon an enemy who had obtained possession of the ditch, without risk of loss to themselves. Hence the designa-tion from Sp. casa, house, and matar, to slay, corresponding to the G. mord-keller, mord-grube, and the OE. slaughter-house. ' Casa-matta, a canonry or slaughter-house, which is a place built low under the walls of a bulwark, not reaching to the height of the ditch, and serveth to annoy the enemy when he entereth the ditch to scale the wall.'—Fl. ' Casemate, a loop-hole in a fortified wall.'—Cot. ' A vault of mason's work in the flank of a bastion next the curtain, to fire on the enemy.'—Bailey. As defence from shells became more important, the term was subse-quently applied to a bomb-proof vault in a fortress, for the security of the defend-ers, without reference to the annoyance of the enemy.
Cash. Ready money. A word intro-duced from the language of book-keeping, where Fr. caisse, the money chest, is the head under which money actually paid in is entered. It was formerly used in the sense of a counter in a shop or place of business. It. cassa, Fr. caisse, a mer-chant's cash or counter.—Fl. Cot.
To Cashier.—To Quash. Du. kasse-ren.—Kil. Fr. casser, quasser, to break, also to casse, cassere, discharge, turn out of service, annul, cancel, abrogate.—Cot. To quash an indictment, to an-nul the proceeding. Lat. cassus, empty, hollow, void; cassare, to annul, discharge; It. casso, made void, cancelled, cashiered, blotted out.—Fl.
Cask.—Casket.—Casque. The Sp. casco signifies a skull, crown of a hat, helmet, cask or wooden vessel for holding liquids, hull of a ship, shell or carcase of a house. It seems generally to signify case or hollow receptacle. See Case. Hence casket, Fr. cassette, a coffer or small case for jewels.
Cassock. Gael. casag, a long coat. It. casacca, Fr. casaque, long man's gown with a close body, from casa, a hut, the notion of covering or sheltering being common to a house and a garment, as we have before seen under Cape and Cabin. So also from It. casipola, casupola, a little house or hut, Fr. chasuble, a garment for performing the mass in, Sp. casulla, OFr. casule, Mid.Lat. casula, quasi minor casa eo quod totum hominem tegat.—Isidore in Diez.

To Cast. ON. kasta. Essentially the same word with Sp. cascar, to crack, break, burst; Fr. casser, to break, crush; It. cascare, to fall. The fundamental image is the sound of a violent collision, represented by the syllable quash, squash, cash, cast. It. accasciare, accastiare, to squash, dash, or bruise together.—Fl. The E. dash with a like imitative origin is used with a like variety of signification. We speak of dashing a thing down, dashing it to pieces, dashing it out of the window. To cast accounts was properly to reckon by counters which were bodily transferred from one place to another. See Awgrim.

Castanets. Snappers which dancers of sarabands tie about their fingers.—B. Sp. castaña, a chesnut; castañetazo, a sound or crack of a chesnut which bursts in the fire, crack given by the joints. Hence castañeta, the snapping of the fingers in a Spanish dance; castañeta, castañuela, the castanets or implement for making a louder snapping; castañetear, to crackle, to clack.

Caste. The artificial divisions of society in India, first made known to us by the Portuguese, and described by them by the term casta, signifying breed, race, kind, which has been retained in E. under the supposition that it was the native name.

Castle. It. castello, Lat. castellum, dim. of castrum (castra), a fortified place.

Castrate. Lat. castro, perhaps from castus, to make clean or chaste.

Cat. G. katze, Gael. cat, ON. köttr. Fin. kasi, kissa, probably from an imitation of the sound made by a cat spitting. Cass! a word to drive away a cat.—Hal. Lang. cassa! cry for the same purpose. The Fin. kutis! is used to drive them away, while kiss! Pol. kic! kic! are used as E. puss! for calling them.

Cat o' nine tails. Pol. kat, executioner; katować, to lash, rack, torture. Lith. kotas, the stalk of plants, shaft of a lance, handle of an axe, &c.; bot-kotis, the handle of a scourge; kotas, the executioner; kotawoti, to scourge, to torture. Russ. koshka, a cat; koshki, a whip with several pitched cords, cat-o'-nine-tails.

Catacomb. Grottoes or subterraneous places for the burial of the dead. The Dict. Etym. says that the name is given in Italy to the tombs of the martyrs which people go to visit by way of devotion. This would tend to support Diez's explanation from Sp. catar, to look at, and tomba, a tomb (as the word is also spelt catatomba and catatumba), or comba, a vault, which, however, is not satisfactory, as a shew is not the primary point of view in which the tombs of the martyrs were likely to have been considered in early times. Moreover the name was apparently confined to certain old quarries used as burial-places near Rome. Others explain it from κατά, down, and κύμβος, a cavity.

Catalogue. Gr. κατάλογος, an enumerating, a list.

Cataract. Gr. καταράκτης, καταῤῥάκτης, from καταῤῥάσσω, to hurl down, to fall as water does over a precipice. Ῥάσσω, ἀράσσω, to dash.

Catastrophe. Gr. στρέφω, to turn; καταστρέφω, to overturn, to bring to an end, to close.

To Catch.—Chase. The words catch and chase are different versions of the same word, coming to us through different dialects of French. In the dialect of Picardy, from which much of the French in our language was introduced, a hard c commonly corresponds to the soft ch of ordinary Fr., and a final ch in Picard to the hard s of ordinary Fr. Thus we have Pic. or Rouchi cat, Fr. chat, a cat; Rouchi caleur, Fr. chaleur, heat; Rouchi forche, Fr. force; Rouchi equerviche, Fr. ecrevisse; Rouchi écaches, Fr. échasses, stilts. In like manner Rouchi cacher, Fr. chasser, to hunt, from the first of which we have E. catch, and from the second chase, the earlier sense of catch, like that of It. cacciare, Fr. chasser, being to drive out, drive away.

Maid thorgh the Lundreis fro London is hatched. R. Brunne, 120.

'Catchyn away—abigo.' 'Catchyn or drive forth bestis, mino.'—Pr. Pm. Fr. chasser, to drive away, follow after, pursue.—Cot. It. cacciare fuora, to drive out; cacciare per terra, to cast or beat to the ground; cacciuolo, a thump, punch, push.—Fl.

The origin is the imitation of the sound of a smart blow by the syllable clatch! passing on the one hand into catch and on the other into latch, by the loss of the l or c respectively. N. klakka, kakka, to strike a resounding object as a board

CATCH.—Aasen. Fr. claquer, Wal. caker, to clap hands, to chatter with the teeth; cake, clap with the hand.—Grandg. G. klatsch! thwick-thwack! a word to imitate the sound made by striking with the hand against a partition wall; klatsch, such a sound or the stroke which produces it, a clap, flap; klatsche, a whip or lash.—Kuttner. Du. kletsen, resono ictu verberare; klets, kletse, ictus resonans, fragor; kletsoore, ketsoore, a whip; Rouchi cachoire, ecachoire, a whip, properly the lash or knotted piece of whipcord added for the purpose of giving sharpness to the crack.—Hécart. Norm. cache, s.s.—Pat. de Bray, Fr. chassoire, a carter's whip.—Cot. Galla catchiza, to crack with a whip, catchi, a whip.—Tutschek. Du. kaetse, a smack, clap, blow, and specially the stroke of a ball at tennis.—Kil. Fr. chasse, E. chase, the distance to which the ball is struck. Arbalète de courte chasse, a cross-bow that carries but a little way.

In the sense of seizing an object the term catch is to be explained as clapping one's hand upon it, snatching it with a smack, in the same way that we speak of catching one a box on the ear. In the sense of a sudden snatch the Sc. has both forms, with and without an l after the c. Claucht, snatched, laid hold of eagerly and suddenly; a catch or seizure of anything in a sudden and forcible way. When one lays hold of what is falling it is said that he 'got a claucht of it.'—Jam. And claucht anone the courser by the rene. D.V. Gael. glac, to take, seize, catch. In the s. s. caucht. Turnus at this time waxis bauld and blythe Wenyng to caucht ane stound his strenth to kythe. D.V. i. e. to catch an opportunity to show his strength. Galla catchamza, to snap, to snatch (said of dogs). For the equivalence of similar forms with and without an l after a c or g, compare G. klatschen, to chat, chatter, clatter.—Kuttner. G. klatscherei, Sp. chachara, chatter; Du. klinke, E. chink.—Kil. Gael. gliong, E. gingle. Rouchi clincailleux, Fr. quincailler, a tinman.

On the other hand the loss of the initial c gives rise to a form lash, latch, with similar meanings to those belonging to words of the form clatch, catch, above explained. Thus we have the lash of a whip corresponding to the G. klatsche and Norm. cache. As Sc. chak expresses 'the sharp sound made by any iron substance when entering its socket, as of the latch of a door when it is shut, to click;' and to chak is 'to shut with a sharp sound' (Jam.); the representation of a like sound by the syllable latch gives its designation to the latch of a door, formerly called cliket, from shutting with a click. And on the same principle on which we have above explained the actual use of the word catch, the OE. latch was commonly used in the sense of seizing, snatching, obtaining possession of.

And if ye latche Lucre let hym not ascapie. P.P.

Catch-poll. A bailiff, one employed to apprehend a person. From poll, the head. On the same principle he was called in Fr. happe-chair, catch-flesh. Fr. chacepol, an officer of taxes.

Catechism. Elementary instruction in the principles of religion by question and answer. Properly a system of oral instruction, from Gr. κατήχησις, κατηχέω, to sound, resound, to sound in the ears of any one, to teach by oral instruction, teach the elements of any science. Κατήχησις, the act of stunning by loud sound or of charming by sound, instruction in the elements of a science. Ἦχος, sound.

Category. Gr. κατηγορία (κατηγορέω, from κατά and ἀγορεύω, to harangue, speak in order), an accusing, but specially an order of ideas, predicament.

* Caterpillar. In Guernsey the name of catte pelaeure seems to be given to caterpillars, weevils, woodlice, mille-pedes.—Metivier. Chate peleuse, a corn-devouring mite or weevil.—Cot. As the weevil is not hairy probably the element peleuse is a corruption. Metivier explains the word from the habit of all these insects of rolling themselves up like a pill; Guernsey pilleure, OFr. pillouire (Roquefort), a pill. Why a grub should be called dog or cat is not apparent. Guernsey catte, the larva of the cock-chafer. Swiss teufelskatz, Lombard gatta, gattola, Fr. chenille (canicula, a little dog), a caterpillar; Milanese can, cagnon (a dog), silkworm.—Diez. Ptg. bicho, bichano (pussy), children's name for cat; bicho, worm, insect, wild-beast.

* Cates.—Caterer. Cates, dainty victuals.—B. The word is rendered by Sherwood by frigaleries, companaige, i. e. dainties, or any kind of relishing food (including meat) eaten with bread. In all probability the suggestion of Skinner that it is curtailed from Nicates, which was used substantively in the same sense, is correct.
Delycates, deyntie meates.—Palsgr.
Richly she feeds, and at the rich man's cost— By sea, by land, of delicates the most Her cater seeks, and spareth for no perell. Wyatt in R.
All kind of daintyes and delicates sweete Was brought for the banquett.—Bessie of Bednall.
The catery was the storeroom where provisions were kept, and the caterer or cater the person who provided them. On the other hand, the officer whose business it was to make purchases for a household was called acatour or achatour, from Prov. acaptar, Fr. achepter, acheter (Lat. adcaptare, Mid.Lat. accapitare—Diez), Rouchi acater, to buy. It. accattare, to acquire.
A gentil manciple was ther of a temple. Of which achatours mighten take ensemple For to ben wise in buying of vitaille. For whether that he paide or took by taille Algate he waited so in his achate, That he was ay before in his estate. Prologue, Manciple's Tale.
Coempcyon is to saie com en achate or buying together [joint buying].—Chaucer, Boethius, B. 2. Pr. 4.
Hence achates or acates signified pur- chases, and the nicer kind of food being commonly purchased abroad the word became confounded with cates. ' One that never made a good meal in his sleep, but sells the acates that are sent him.'—B. Jonson in R.
Provider, acater, despencier.—Palsgr.
Cathartic. Gr. Καθαρτικός, having the property of cleansing, from καθαίρω, to purge, make clean.
Cathedral. Gr. Καθέδρα, a seat, chair, specially the seat of office of a master or professor in science, &c., a pulpit, whence cathedralis, applied to a church contain- ing a bishop's seat.
Catkin. It is probably not so much from the resemblance to a cat's tail as from a cat being taken as the type of what is furry or downy that the name of catkin, Fr. catons, Du. katte, katteken, G. kätzchen, little cat, is given to the downy or feathery flowers of the willow, hazel, &c. Thus Bav. mudel, puss, is used in the sense of cat-skin, fur in general, flock, flue, catkin ; mitz, mutz, puss, fur, cat- kin ; Magy. macska, cat ; maczoka, kitten, lamb, catkin ; Pol. kocie, kitten ; kotki, kocianki, catkins ; Fr. minon, puss, cat- kin.
Cattle. See Chattel.
Caudle. A warm comforting drink. Fr. chaudeau, from chaud, hot.

Caul. The omentum or fatty network in which the bowels are wrapped. It. rete, reticella; rete del fegato, the caul of the liver. A caul is also a small net to confine the hair, and hence a skull-cap, also the membrane covering the face of some infants at their birth. The proper meaning of the word seems to be a net, whence it is provincially used in the sense of a spider's web.—Hal. Rete, any net or caul-work.—Fl.
Her head with ringlets of her hair is crowned. And in a golden caul the curls are bound. Dryden in R Fr. cale, a kind of little cap ; calotte, a skull-cap.
The primitive meaning is a shale or peel, what is shaled or picked off. Fr. cale, challe de noix, the green husk of a walnut ; calon, walnut with the husk on ; challer, to shale or peel.—Jaubert.
The word is otherwise written kell.
Cauldron. Fr. chauderon, chaudron, chaudière, a kettle for heating water. Chaud, It. caldo, Lat. calidus, hot.
Cauliflower. Fr. choufleur (chou, cabbage), the cabbage whose eatable part consists of the abnormally developed flower-buds. Lat. caulis, a stalk, cab- bage-stalk, cabbage.
Cause. Lat. causa.
Causeway. Fr. chaussée, a paved road. Mid.Lat. calceata, calceta, a road ; calceata, shod or protected from the tread- ing of the horses by a coating of wood or stone. Fr. chausser, to shoe ; Port. calçar, to shoe, also to pave ; calçada, a pavement, the stones of a street. Du. kautsije, kaussijde, kassije, via strata.— Kil.
Caustic.—Cauterise. Gr. καυστικός, apt to burn ; καυτήρ, καυτήριον, a branding iron, from καίω, to burn.
Caution. Lat. cautio, from caveo (p.p. cautus), to beware.
Cavalier.—Cavalry.—Cavalcade. It. cavaliere, Fr. chevalier, a horseman. It. cavallo, Fr. cheval, a horse, Lat. caballus, Gr. καβάλλης, OE. caple. ' Caballus, a horse ; yet in some parts of England they do call an horse a cable.'—Elyot in Way. w. ceffyl, a horse ; Gael. capull, Pol. kobyla, Russ. kobuil', a mare.
Cave.—Cavern.—Cavity. Lat. cavus, hollow. The origin of the word seems a representation of the sound made by knocking against a hollow body. Fin. kopista, dumpf tönen, klopfend knallen, to sound like a blow ; kopano, caudex arboris cavus pulsu resonans ; koparo, koparet, a receptacle for small things, coffer, pit; kopera or kowera, hollow, curved, crooked; kopio, empty, sounding as an empty vessel; koppa, anything hollowed or vaulted; kanteleen koppa, the box or sounding-board of the harp; pii-pun koppa, the bowl of a pipe; koppa-mato, a beetle or crustaceous insect; koppa nokka, an aquiline nose, &c.; kop-peli, a hut, little house.

So from Fin. kommata, komista, to sound deep or hollow as an empty vessel, komo, hollow, giving a hollow sound; komo jaa, hollow ice; wuoren komo, a cavern in a mountain (wuora, a moun-tain).

Caveson. A kind of bridle put upon the nose of a horse in order to break and manage him.—B. Fr. caveçon, Sp. cabe-gon. It. cavezzone, augm. of cavezza, a halter, and that from Sp. cabeça, a head. A false accommodation produced G. kapp-zaum, as if from kappen, to cut, and zaum, bridle, a severe bridle.

Cavil. Lat. cavillor, to argue cap-tiously, quibble.

Cease.—Cessation. Lat. cesso, to cease.

-cease.—Decease. Lat. decessus, de-parture, Fr. décès, departure from this life, death. See -cede.

Cede, -cede, -ceed, -cess. Lat. cedo, cessum, to go forth, step away, give place, yield. Hence concede, exceed, proceed, recede, succeed, &c., with their substan-tives concession, excess, &c.

Ceiling. The It. cielo, Fr. ciel, heaven, sky, were met. applied to a canopy, the testern of a bed, the inner roof of a room of state.—Cot. In the same way G. him-mel, heaven, is applied to a canopy, the roof of a coach, or of a bed. The import-ation of Fr. ciel into English without translation gave cele, seele, a canopy. 'In this wise the King shall ride opyn heded undre a seele of cloth of gold baudekyn with four staves gilt.'—Rutland papers, Cam. Soc. pp. 5, 7, &c. 'The chammer was hanged of red and of blew, and in it was a cyll of state of cloth of gold, but the Kyng was not under for that sam day.'—Marriage of James IV. in Jam. The name was extended to the seat of dignity with its canopy over. 'And seik to your soverane, semely on syll.'—Gawan and Gol. in Jam. From the noun was formed the verb to cele or sile, to canopy; siled, canopied, hung, 'All the tente within was syled wyth clothe of gold and blew velvet.'—Hall, H. VIII. p. 32; sylure, selure, selar, cellar, cyling (W. Worc. in Hal.), a canopy, tester of a bed, ceiling.

The kynge to souper is set, served in halle Under a siller of silk, dayntily dight. Sir Gawaine & Sir Gol.

Cellar for a bedde, ciel de lit.—Palsgr: 'A celler to hange in the chamber.'—Ordinances and Reg. in Hal.

As the canopy or covering of a bed or tent would not only be stretched overhead, but hang around at the sides, it was natu-ral that the same name should be given both to the roof and the side hangings. Thus silyng is found in the sense of ta-pestry.

'The French kyng caused the lorde of Countay to stande secretly behynde a silyng or a hangyng in his chamber.'—Hall, E. IV. p. 43. And as tapestry and wainscoting served the same purpose of hiding the bareness of the walls and shut-ting out the draught, it was an easy step to the sense of wainscoting, which is still known by the name of ceiling in Craven. To seele a room, lambrisser une chambre; seeling, lambris, menuiserie.—Sherwood.

The sense of roofing, and all conscious reference to the notion of the heaven or sky being now completely lost, and the main object of the wainscoting being to shut out draughts, it is probable that the word was confounded with sealing in the sense of closing, and it was even applied to the planking of the floor. 'Plancher, to plank or floor with planks, to seele or close with boards; plancher, a boarded floor, also a seeling of boards.'—Cot. The ceiling was called the upper ceiling, Fr. sus-lambris, to distinguish it from the wainscot or seeling of the walls.

The line of descent from Fr. ciel is so unbroken, that, unless we separate the sense of canopy or hangings from that of wainscoting, the ground is cut away from Aufrecht's derivation from AS. thil, thel, thelu, a log, beam, rafter, plank, board; thiling, a planking or boarding; thilian, to plank; ON. thil, thili, thilja, a board, plank, wainscot; thiljar (in pl.), the deck of a ship; at thilja, to panel or wainscot; MHG. dil, dille, a plank, wall, ceiling, flooring; E. deal, a fir-plank. In the Walser dialect of the Grisons, obardili is the boarded ceiling of a room. Aufrecht identifies with the foregoing, AS. syl, a log, post, column; E. sill in window-sill, door-sill; Sc. sill, a log, syle, a beam. And it is certainly possible that syling in the sense of planking or ceiling may have come from this source. 'The olde syling that was once faste joyned together with nailes will begin to cling, and then to gape.'—Z. Boyd in Jam. In the N. of E thill, a shaft, is in some places called sill; a thill horse and a sill horse, a shaft horse.
To seel or close the eyes, &c. sile, syll, to blindfold, and thence to conceal, is totally distinct from the foregoing, being taken from Fr. ciller, cillier, siller les yeux, to seele or sew up the eyelids; (and thence also) to hoodwink, blind, keep in darkness.—Cot. It. cigliare, to twinkle with the eyes, to seal a pigeon's eye, or any bird's.—Fl. Fr. cil. It. ciglio, Lat. cilium, an eyelash, eyelid. The term properly signifies the sewing up the eyelid of a hawk for the purpose of taming it. 'And he must take wyth hym nedyll and threde, to ensele the haukes that ben taken. —Take the nedyll and threde, and put it through the over eyelydde, and so of that other, and make them faste vnd the becke that she se not, and then she is enseled as she ought to be.'—Book of St Albans, in Marsh.
-ceive, -cept, -ceit. Lat. capio, cap-tum, in comp. -cipio, -ceptum, to take. Prov. caber, to take, in comp. -cebre (con-cebre, decebre) ; It. (con)cipere, -cepire, -cepere, OFr. -ciper, -civer (conciver—Roquef.), -çoivre, Fr. -cevoir. The p of the participle -ceptus is seen in OE. conceipt, deceipt, receipt, but was gradually lost in conceit, deceit, &c., as in It. concetto.
Celebrate.—Celebrity. Lat. celeber (of a place), much frequented, thronged ; hence (of a day), festive, solemn ; (of per-sons) renowned, as entering largely into the talk of men, in accordance with the expression of Ennius, 'volito vivus per ora virum.' Celebritas, a numerous con-course of people, abundance, renown ; celebro, to visit in numbers, to attend on a solemnity, to celebrate.
Celerity.—Accelerate. Lat. celer, swift.
Celestial. Cœlum, heaven, the hollow vault of heaven ; Gr. κοῖλος, hollow.
Celibacy. Lat. cœlebs, unmarried. Fr. célibat, single or unwedded life.
Cell.—Cellar. Lat. cella, a storehouse for wine, oil, provisions generally ; also a hut, cot, quarters for slaves.
Cement. Lat. cæmentum, stones rough from the quarry, rubble, materials for building, mortar.
Cemetery. Gr. κοιμητήριον (from κοι-μάομαι, to sleep), the place where the de-parted sleep.
-cend, -cense, Censer.—To Incense. Lat. candeo, to glow, to burn ; incendo, -sum, to set on fire, and met. to incense, make angry. Incensum, Fr. encens, what is burnt in sacrifices, incense, and thence censer, a vessel in which incense was burnt.
Cenotaph. Gr. κενοτάφιον (κενὸς, empty, and τάφος, a tomb, from θάπτω, to bury), a monument erected for one buried else-where.
Census.—Censor.—Censure. Lat. census, a valuation of every man's estate, a registration of one's self, age, family, possessions, &c., from censeo, to think, judge, estimate. Censor, the officer ap-pointed to take such returns ; censura, his office, also grave opinion, criticism.
Centre. Gr. κεντέω, to prick, goad, sting ; κέντρον, a prick, point, the point round which a circle is drawn.
Centurion.—Century. Lat. centum, a hundred ; centuria, a hundred of what-soever persons or objects ; centurio, the captain over a hundred foot-soldiers.
Cereal. Lat. cerealis, of or pertaining to Ceres the goddess of corn and the harvest, thence belonging to or connected with corn.
Ceremony. Lat. cæremonia, ceremo-nia, a religious observance, a solemnity, sacred show.
-cern.—Certain. Gr. κρίνω, to sepa-rate, pick out, decide, judge ; Lat. cerno, crevi, cretum, to separate, sift, distin-guish, observe, see, judge, contend. In certus, sure, we have a modified form of the r, a form which also gives rise to the derivative certo, to contend. Fr. concerner, to concern, appertain, or belong unto (Cot.), is the opposite of dis-cern, to distinguish. Lat. concernor, to be embodied with, to be regarded as one object with.
-cess. See Cede.
Cess. A tax. For sess from assess, but spelt with a c from the influence of the Lat. census, the rating of Roman citi-zens according to their property. See Assize, Assess. Fr. censer, to rate, assess, tax, value.—Cot.
Chafe, 1.—Chafing-dish. To chafe is to heat by rubbing, to rub for the purpose of heating, then to rub without reference to the production of heat. Lat. calefacere, It. calefare, Fr. chauffer, échauffer, to heat, to warm, to chafe. Fr. chaufferette, a chafing-dish or pan of hot coals for warm-ing a room where there is not fire.
Chafe, 2. In the sense of chafing with anger two distinct words are probably confounded ; 1st from It. riscaldarsi, to become heated with anger, Fr. eschauffer, to set in a chafe.—Sherwood.

For certes the herte of manne by eschaufinge and moving of his blode waxeth so troubled that it is out of all manere judgement of reson.—Parson's tale. De Irâ.
But to chafe has often a much more precise sense than this, and signifies to snort, fume, breathe hard. It. sborfare, to huff, snuff, or puff with snorting, to chafe and fret with rage and anger; tronfo, tronfio, puffed or ruffled with chafing.—Fl. Bouffard, often puffing, much blowing, swelling with anger, in a great chafe, in a monstrous fume.—Cot. In this application it is the correlative of the G. keuchen, to puff and blow, breathe thick and short, to pant, Bav. kauchen, to breathe, puff.
* Chafer.—Cheffern. Cock-chafer; fern-chafer. G. käfer, AS. ceafer, Du. kever, any insect of the beetle kind, having a hard case to their wings. Perhaps from Swiss kafeln, käfelen, to gnaw.
Chaff. AS. ceaf, G. kaff. Pers. khah.—Adelung. Fin. kahista, leviter crepo vel susurro, movendo parum strideo ut gramen sub pedibus euntis vel arundo vento agitata (to rustle); whence kahina, a rustling; kahu, kahuja, hordeum vel avena vilior, taubes korn oder hafer, light rustling corn, consisting chiefly of husks; kuhata, kuhista, to buzz, hiss, rustle; kuhina, a rustling noise, rustling motion as of ants, &c.; kuhu-ohrat (ohrat, barley), refuse barley; kuhuja, quisquiliæ vel paleæ quæ motæ leviter susurrant, chaff.
To Chaff. In vulgar language, to rally one, to chatter or talk lightly. From a representation of the inarticulate sounds made by different kinds of animals uttering rapidly repeated cries. Du. keffen, to yap, to bark, also to prattle, chatter, tattle.—Halma. Wall. chawe, a chough, jack-daw; chaweter, to caw; chawer, to cheep, to cry; chafeter, to babble, tattle; Fr. cauvette, a jackdaw, a prattling woman.—Pat. de Brai. G. kaff, idle words, impertinence.—Küttn.
* To Chaffer. To buy and sell, to bargain, haggle. OE. chapfare, chaffare, properly the subject of a chap or bargain, Lenere corteys (courteous lender), that leneth without chapfare makiinde.—Ayenbite, p. 35. There were chapmen ychose the chaffare to preise.—P. P. vis. 11.
Chaft. The jaw; chafty, talkative.—Hal. ON. kiaftr, jaw, muzzle, chaps; kiafta, kiamta, to move the jaws, to tattle. See Cheek.
Chagrin. Fr. chagrin, care, grief. According to Diez, from the shark-skin. or rough substance called shagreen, Fr. peau de chagrin, which from being used as a rasp for polishing wood was taken as a type of the gnawing of care or grief. Genoese sagrind, to gnaw, sagrindse, to consume with anger. Piedm. sagri, shagreen; sagrin, care, grief. In like manner It. limare, to file, metaphorically to fret—Fl.; far lima-lima, to fret inwardly.—Altieri.
Chain. Lat. catena, Prov. cadena, cana, OFr. chaene, Fr. chaine, ON. kedja, a chain.
Chair.—Chaise. Gr. Καθέδρα, from Καθέζομαι, to sit. Lat. cathedra, Fr. chaire, a seat, a pulpit. As the loss of a d in cadena gives chain, a double operation of the same nature reduces cathedra (ca'e'ra) to chair. Prov. cadieira, cadera, OFr. chayire. Chayire, cathedra.—Pr. Pm. The conversion of the r into s gives Fr. chaise, a pulpit—Cot., now a chair. Then, as a carriage is a moveable seat, the word has acquired in E. the sense of a carriage, pleasure carriage.
Chalice. Fr. calice, Lat. calix, a goblet, cup.
Chalk. Fr. chaulx, lime; Lat. calx, limestone, lime.
Challenge. Fr. chalanger, to claim, challenge, make title unto; also to accuse of, charge with, call in question for an offence.—Cot. Hence to challenge one to fight is to call on him to decide the matter by combat. From the forensic Latin calumniare, to institute an action, to go to law.—Duc. So from dominio, domnio, dongio, E. dungeon; from somnium, Fr. songe. Prov. calonja, dispute; calumpnjamen, contestation, difficulty; calonjar, to dispute, refuse. The sacramentum de calumniâ was an oath on the part of the person bringing an action of the justice of his ground of action, and as this was the beginning of the suit it is probably from thence that calumniari in the sense of bringing an action arose. 'Can hom ven al plaiz et fa sagramen de calompnia.' 'Sagrament de calompnia o de vertat per la una part e per l'autra.'—Rayn. Lat. calumnia, false accusation, chicane.
Chamade. A signal by drum or trumpet given by an enemy when they have a mind to parley.—B. From Port. chamar, Lat. clamare, to call.
Chamber. Fr. chambre. Lat. camera, Gr. Καμάρα, a vault or arched roof, place with an arched roof. Probably from cam, crooked. Camera, gewölb. Camerare, krümmen; cameratus, gekrümmt, gebogen, gewölbt.—Dief. Sup.
Chamberlain. Fr. chambellan; It. camerlengo, ciamberlano, ciambellano.
To Chamfer. To hollow out in channels, to flute as a column, to bevel. Ptg. chanfrar, to hollow out, to slope. Sp. chaflán, Fr. chamfrain, chanfrein, the slope of a bevelled angle, a hollow groove; chanfreiner, chanfreindre, to bevel off a right angle, to slope out the top of a borehole.
Chamfron.—Chamfrain.—Charfron. Fr. chanfrein, the front piece of a horse's head armour.
To Chamm.—Champ. E. dial, to cham, champ, chamble, to chew.—Hal. Properly to chew so as to make the snapping of the jaws be heard. Magy. tsammogni, tsamtsogni, to make a noise with the teeth in chewing. Gall. djam-djam-goda (to make djam-djam), to smack the lips in eating, as swine, to champ, move the jaws.—Tutschek. The G. schmatzen s. s. differs only in the transposition of the letter m. ON. kampa, to chew; kiammi, a jaw; kiamsa, to champ, to move the jaws; kiamt, champing.
The sound of striking the ground with the foot is sometimes represented in the same manner, as in It. zampettare, to paw the ground; E. dial. champ, to tread heavily.—Hal.
Champaign. See Camp.
Champarty. Partnership. Fr. champ parti, Lat. campus partitus; as jeopardy, from Fr. jeu parti, Lat. jocus partitus, divided game.
Champion. Commonly derived from campus, a field of battle, fighting place. And no doubt the word might have early been introduced from Latin into the Teutonic and Scandinavian languages, giving rise to the AS. camp, fight, cempa, ON. kempa, a warrior, champion; Du. kamp, combat, contest; kampen, kempen, to fight in single combat; kamper, kempe, an athlete, prize-fighter.
It must be observed however that the Scandinavian kapp appears a more ancient form than the nasalised camp. ON. kapp, contention; kappi, athlete, hero; Sw. dricka i kapp, to drink for a wager; kapp-ridande, a horse-race. So in E. boys speak of capping verses, i. e. contending in the citation of verses; to cap one at leaping is to beat one at a contest in leaping. Hence (with the nasal) w. camp, a feat, game; campio, to strive at games; campus, excellent, surpassing, masterly; Sp. campear, campar, to be eminent, to excel. The word is preserved in E. dial. camp, a game at football. 'Campar, or player at football, pedilusor.'—Pr. Pm.
Get campers a ball To camp therewithal.—Tusser.
E. dial, to cample, to talk, contend or argue; G. kampeln, to debate, dispute; E. dial. champ, a scuffle.—Hal. The origin may perhaps be found in the notion of fastening on one in the act of wrestling.
Lith. kabinti, to hang; kabintis, to fasten oneself on to another; kabe, kabéle, kablys, a hook; kimbu, kibti, to fasten on, to stick to, to hold; sukibti, to fasten oneself to another; Fin. kimppu (Lap. kippo, kappo), a bundle, and thence the laying hold of each other by wrestlers; kimpustella, to wrestle. Esthon. kimp, bundle, pinch, difficulty; kimpüma, to quarrel (comp. G. kampeln, E. cample). Du. kimpen, to wrestle, luctare, certare.—Kil.
To cope or contend with, which seems another form of the root, is explained by Torriano 'serrarsi, attaccarsi l'un con l'altro;' 'se harper l'un a l'autre.'—Sherwood.
Chance. The happening of things governed by laws of which we are more or less ignorant. Fr. chance; OFr. chéance, act of falling, from cheoir, Lat. cadere, Prov. cazer, Sp. caer, Ptg. cahir, to fall. Prov. escazenza, accident, chance. It will be observed that accident is the same word direct from the Lat. accidere, to happen (ad and cadere, to fall).
Chance-medley. Fr. chaude meslée, from chaud, hot, and meslée, fray, bickering, fight; an accidental conflict in hot blood. 'Mêlée qui était meue chaleureusement et sans aguet.' M.Lat. calida melleia, calidameya. Meleare, mesleiare, to quarrel, broil.—Carpentier. When the element chaud lost its meaning to ordinary English ears, it was replaced by chance in accordance with the meaning of the compound.
Chancel.—Chancellor.—Chancery. The part of the church in which the altar is placed is called chancel, from being railed off or separated from the rest of the church by lattice-work, Lat. cancelli. The cancellarii seem to have been the officers of a court of justice, who stood ad cancellos, at the railings, received the petitions of the suitors, and acted as intermediaries between them and the judge. To them naturally fell the office of keeping the seal of the court, the distinctive feature of the chancellors of modern time.
From chancellor, are Fr. chancellerie, E. chancery.
Chandler. Fr. chandelier, a dealer in candles; then, as if the essential mean-ing of the word had been simply dealer, extended to other trades, as corn-chand-ler. Chandry, the place where candles are kept, from chandler, as chancery from chancellor.
To Change. Prov. cambiar, camjar. It. cambiare, cangiare, Fr. changer. Bret. kemma, to truck, exchange. Cambiare seems the nasalised form of E. chop, chap, to swap, exchange, ON. kaupa, to deal, as Chaucer's champmen for chapmen.
In Surrey whilome dwelt a company Of champmen rich and therto sad and true, That wide were sent in their spicery, Their chaffare was so thrifty and so new. Man of Law's Tale, 140.
In like manner Walach. schimba, to change, to put on fresh clothes, may be compared with ON. skipta, E. shift. Walach., schimbu, cambium, exchange; schimbatoriu, a money-changer. See Chop.
Channel. Lat. canalis, a pipe, water-conduit, from canna, a reed. The word appears in English under a triple form: channel, any hollow for conveying water, kennel, the gutter that runs along a street, and the modern canal.
Chant.—Chantry. Lat. cantare, Fr. chanter, to sing. Hence chantry, a chapel endowed for a priest to sing mass for the soul of the founders.
Chap. 1. Chaps or chops, the loose flesh of the cheeks, lips of an animal. AS. ceaplas, ceaflas, the chaps; Da. gab, the mouth, throat of an animal. See Cheek.
Chap. 2. A fellow. Probably from chap, cheek, jaw. Da. kiæft, jaw, muz-zle, chaps, is vulgarly used in the sense of individual.—Molbech. And N. kiæft as well as kjakje, a jaw, is used in the same sense; kvar kjæften, every man Jack; inkje ein kjæft,—kjaakaa, not a soul.—Aasen. In Lincoln cheek is used in the same way for person or fellow.
Chap.—Chip.—Chop. These are forms having a common origin in the attempt to represent the sound made by the knock-ing of two hard bodies, or the cracking of one, the thinner vowel i being used to represent the high note of a crack, while the broader vowels a and o are used for the flatter sound made by the collision of hard bodies. Sc. chap, to strike, as to chap hands, to chap at a door.—Jam. It is also used in the sense of the E. chop, to strike with a sharp edge, to cut up into small pieces, to cut off; Du. kappen, to cut, prune, hack; Lith. kapoti, to peck, to hack, to cut, to paw like a horse; W. cobio, to strike, to peck.
Again as a hard body in breaking gives a sharp sound like the knocking of hard things together, a chap is a crack or fis-sure, properly in a hard body, but ex-tended to bodies which give no sound in breaking, as skin; chapped hands. Com-pare chark, to creak, and also to chap or crack.—Hal. The use of crack in the sense of fissure is to be explained in the same manner. Lang. esclapa, to split wood, to break; esclapo, a chip.
The thinner vowel in chip expresses the sharper sound made by the separation of a very small fragment of a hard body, and the term is also applied to the small piece separated from the block.
Chape. A plate of metal at the point of a scabbard. Hence the white tip of a fox's tail.—Hal. The fundamental mean-ing is something clapt on, from clap, the representation of the sound made by two flat surfaces striking together. Hence It. chiappa, a patch of lead clapt unto a ship that is shot; a piece of lead to cover the touch-hole of a gun, also a clap, and anything that may be taken hold of.—Fl. Sp. chapa, a small plate of flat metal, leather, or the like; chapar, to plate, to coat; chapeta, chapilla, a small metal plate; Port. chapear, to plate, to apply one flat thing to another. Sp. chapelete de una bomba, Fr. clapet, the clapper or sucker of a ship's pump; Sp. chapeletas de imbornales, the clappers of the scupper holes. Russ. klepan, a strip of metal plate, as those on a trunk.
Chapel. Commonly derived from ca-pella, the cape or little cloke of St Mar-tin, which was preserved in the Palace of the kings of the Franks, and used as the most binding relic on which an oath could be taken.
Tunc in Palatio nostro super Capellam domini Martini, ubi reliqua sacramenta percurrant, de-beant conjurare.—Marculfus in Duc.
Hence it is supposed the name of ca-pella was given to the apartment of the Palace in which the relics of the saints were kept, and thence extended to similar repositories where priests were commonly appointed to celebrate divine services.
Rex sanctas sibi de capella sua reliquias deferri præcepit.—Ordericus Vitalis.

But we have no occasion to resort to so hypothetical a derivation. The canopy or covering of an altar where mass was celebrated was called capella, a hood. Mid.Lat. capellare, tegere, decken, be-decken ; capella, ein himeltz, gehymels (eucharistie, &c.), the canopy over the sacred elements ; eine kleine Kirche.—Dief. Sup. And it can hardly be doubted that the name of the canopy was extended to the recess in a church in which an altar was placed, forming the capella or chapel of the saint to whom the altar was dedicated.

Chaplet. A wreath for the head. Fr. chapelet, dim. of chapel, from capa, a cape or cope. The OFr. chapel, from signifying a hat or covering for the head, came to be used in the sense of a wreath or garland. ' Cappello, ghirlanda secondo il volgar francese.'—Boccaccio in Diez. Hence applied to a circular string of praying beads, called in Sp. for the same reason rosario, a garland of roses, and in It. corona.

Chapman. AS. ceap-man, a merchant. See Cheap.

Chapter. Fr. chapitre, from capitulum, a head or division of a book. The Chapter of a cathedral is the assembly of the governing body. It. capitolo, Sp. capitulo, cabildo, Prov. capital, Fr. chapitre.

Character. Gr. χαρακτήρ (χαράσσω, to grave or make incised marks on an object), a mark made on a thing, a mark of distinction.

Charade. See Charlatan.

* Charcoal.—To Char. Charcoal was rightly explained by Tooke from AS. cerran, OE. char, to turn, as being wood turned to coal.

Then Nestor broiled them on the cole-turn'd wood.—Chapman.

To char is now only used in the special application of turning to coal, burning without consuming the substance.

His profession—did put him upon finding a way of charring sea coal, wherein it is in about three hours or less without pots or vessels brought to charcoal.—Boyle in R.

It is extraordinary that so plausible an explanation should have failed to produce conviction, but the following quotation from William and the Werewolf will probably be found conclusive. In that work the verb is written caire, and occurs frequently in the sense of turn one's steps, return, go, and at line 2520 it runs— Choliers that cayreden col come there biside, And other wijes that were wont wode for to fecche ; i. e. colliers that charred coal, that turned wood to coal, charcoal burners.

The G. equivalent kehren is used in a similar manner in the sense of changing the nature of a thing. ' Als sich Lucifer in eine schlange kehrt :' as Lucifer turns himself into a snake.

Chare. A chare is a turn of work ; chare-woman, one who is engaged for an occasional turn. Swiss, es ist mi cheer, it is my turn ; cher um cher, in turns, turn about.—Deutsch. Mundart. 2. 370. AS. cyre, a turn ; cerran, Du. keeren, to turn ; Gael. car, turn, twist.

Charge. It. caricare, Ptg. carregar, Fr. charger, to load ; properly to place in a car. Lat. carricare, from carrus. To charge an enemy is to lay on.

Lay on, Macduff, And damned be he who first cries Hold, enough.

Charity. Lat. caritas, charitas, dearness (in both senses), affection. Lat. carus, dear, beloved. W. caru, Bret. karout, to love.

Chark.—Chirk. AS. cearcian, to creak, crash, gnash. Lith. kirkti, to cry as a child, creak, cluck ; kirklys, a cricket ; karkti (schnarren, schreien, krächzen), to whirr as a beetle, cluck, gaggle ; kurkti, to croak as a frog ; kurkelis, the turtle dove ; czurksti, to chirp as sparrows, czirksti, to chirp, twitter.

Charlatan.—Charade. Fr. charlatan, a mountebank, prattling quacksalver, babbler, tattler.—Cot. It. ciarlatore, from ciarlare, to tattle, chatter. Sp. charlar, chirlar, to prattle, jabber, clack, chat. An imitative word representing the inarticulate chattering or chirping of birds. Sp. chirriar, to chirp, chirk, creak, hiss ; Lith. czurliwoti, to sing or chirp as birds, czirbti, to prattle, chatter.

From Norm. charer, Lang. chara, to converse, seems to be derived charade, a kind of riddle by way of social amusement, as Pol. gadka, a riddle, from gadai, to talk ; Boh. hadka, a dispute ; pohadka, a riddle, charade, W. siarad (pronounced sharad), babbling, talking.

Charlock. A weed among corn ; also called kedlock. AS. cedeleac.

Charm. An enchantment. Fr. charme ; It. carme, carmo, a charm, a spell, a verse, a rhyme.—Fl. From Lat. carmen, which was used in the sense of magic incantation. ' Venefici qui magicis susurris seu carminibus homines occidunt.—Justin. Inst. Hence carminare, to enchant; incarminatrix, an enchantress. From carmen was formed It. carme and Fr. charmer, as from nomen It. nome and Fr. nommer, to name.—Diez. The root of the Lat. carmen is presented in AS. cyrm, noise, shout; OE. charm, a hum or low murmuring noise, the noise of birds, whence a charm of goldfinches, a flock of those birds. I charme as byrdes do when they make a noise a great number together.—Palsgrave.

Charnel-house. Fr. charnier, a churchyard or charnel-house, a place where dead bodies are laid or their bones kept.—Cot. Lat. caro, carnis; Fr. chair, flesh.

Chart.—Charter. See Card.

Chary. AS. cearig (from cearian, to care), careful, chary. Du. karigh, sordidus, parcus, tenax.—Kil. G. karg, niggardly.

To Chase. 1. To work or emboss plate as silversmiths do.—B. Fr. chasse (another form of caisse; see Case), a shrine for a relic, also that thing or part of a thing wherein another is enchased; la chasse d'un rasoir, the handle of a razor; la chasse d'une rose, the calix of a rose.—Cot. It. cassa s. s. Fr. enchasser. It. incassare, to set a jewel, to enchase it; and as the setting was commonly of ornamental work the E. chasing has come to signify embossed jeweller's work.

To Chase. 2. See Catch.

Chasm. Gr. χάσμα, a yawning, a gap, from χάω, χαίνω, to gape, be wide open.

Chaste. Lat. castus, pure. Pol. czysty, clean, pure, chaste. Russ. chist', clean, pure, clear, limpid. The origin seems preserved in the Fin. kastaa, to wet, to baptize, whence the notion of cleanliness as the consequence of washing. See Cistern.

To Chasten.—Chastise. Fr. châtier, Lat. castigare, from castus, clean, chaste, pure, as purgare from purus.

Chat.—Chatter. To talk, converse, make a noise as birds do, prattle. An imitative word. It. gazzolare, gazzogliare, gazzerare, gazzettare, to chat or chatter as a piot or a jay, to chirp, warble, prate.—Fl. Fr. gazeuiller, to chirp, warble, whistle. Magy. csatora (Magy. cs = E. ch), noise, racket; csatordzni, to make a noise, chatter, talk much; csacsogni, to chatter or prattle; csacsogany, a chatter-box, magpie, jackdaw; Pol. gadáć, to talk, gadu-gadu, chit-chat, tittle-tattle. Malay, kata, a word, speak; kata-kata, discourse, talk.

Chats.—Chit. Chat-wood, little sticks fit for fuel.—Bailey. Yorkshire chat, a twig; Suffolk chaits, fragments or leavings of food, as turnip-chaits, scraps of offal; blackthorn-chats, the young shoots or suckers on rough borders, occasionally cut and faggoted.—Forby. To chit, to germinate; chits, the first sprouts of anything.—Hal. The primary import of the syllable chat, chit, chick, chip, is to represent the sharp sound of a crack, then the cracking of the hard case or shell in which something is contained, and the peeping or shooting forth of the imprisoned life within; or on the other hand it may be applied simply to designate the fragments of the broken object. In the latter sense chat may be compared with the Fr. eclats, shivers, splinters, fragments, from the sound of a body bursting or cracking, to which it bears the same relation as chape, a plate of metal, to clap. It must be observed that the letters p, k, t, are used with great indifference at the end of syllables imitative of natural sounds, as in the E. clap, clack, clatter; G. knappen, knacken, knattern, to crack, crackle. We accordingly find the syllables chat or chit, chick, chip, or equivalent forms, used to represent a sharp note, as that made by the crack of a hard substance, or the cry of a bird or the like. To chitter or chipper, to chirp as a bird; to cheep, to cry as a chicken; chip, the cry of the bat.—Hal. To chip is then to crack, to separate in morsels, to break open and burst forth as a blossom out of the bud, or a bird out of the egg. The rois knoppis tetand furth thare hede Gan chyp and kythe their vernal lippis red. D. V. in Jam. The egg is chipped, the bird is flown.—Jam. Du. kippen, cudere, ferire, also to hatch.—Kil. It. schioppare, to crack, snap, or pop, to burst open.—Fl. In like manner Russ. chikat', OE. chykkyn (Pr. Pm.), to cheep or peep as a young bird; then chick (Hal.), a crack or a flaw; also to germinate or spring forth. And thus probably has arisen the sense of germination belonging to chat or chit. Chit in the sense of a child is metaphorically taken from the figure of a shoot, as we speak of olive branches, or a sprig of nobility for a young aristocrat. So in Gael. gallan or ogan, a branch, also a youth, a young man; geug, a branch and a young female. Parallel with E. chit in the latter sense the It. has cito, cita, citello, zitella, a young boy or girl.
Chattels.—Cattle. Fr. chatel, OFr. chaptel, a piece of moveable property, from Lat. capitale, whence captale, catallum, the principal sum in a loan, as distinguished from the interest due upon it. 'Semper renovabantur cartæ et usura quæ excrevit vertebatur in catallum'—Cronica Jocelini. Cam. Soc. Then, in the same way as we speak at the present day of a man of large capital for a man of large possessions, catallum came to be used in the sense of goods in general, with the exception of land, and was specially applied to cattle as the principal wealth of the country in an early stage of society.
Juxta facultates suas et juxta catalla sua.—Laws of Edward the Confessor. Cum decimis omnium terrarum ac bonorum aliorum sive catallorum.—Ingulphus. Rustici curtillum debet esse clausum æstate simul et hieme. Si disclausum sit et introeat alicujus vicini sui captale per suum apertum.—Brompton in Duc.

It should be observed that there is the same double meaning in AS. ceap, goods, cattle, which is the word in the laws of Ina translated captale in the foregoing passage ; and this may perhaps be the reason why the Lat. equivalent capitale was applied to beasts of the farm with us, while it never acquired that meaning in Fr. Bret. chatal, cattle.
Chawl.—Chowl.—Chole. AS. ceafl, snout, ceaflas, jaws, cheeks, lead to OE. chavylbone or chawlbone, mandibula.—Pr. Pm. NE. choule, jaw. The strap of the bridle under the jaw is called the choulband.—Hal. See Cheek, Chew.
Cheap. The modern sense of low in price is an ellipse for good cheap, equivalent to Fr. bon marché, from AS. ceap, price, sale, goods, cattle. Goth. kaupon, to deal ; ON. kaupa, to negotiate, buy ; Du. koopen, G. kaufen, to buy; kaufmann, E. chapman, a dealer. Slav. kupiti, Bohem. kaupiti, to buy. Gr. κάπηλος, Lat. caupo, a tavern-keeper, tradesman.—Dief. Ihre shows satisfactorily that the modern sense of buying is not the original force of the word, which is used in the sense of bargaining, agreeing upon, exchanging, giving or taking in exchange, and hence either buying or selling. 'Ek villdi kaupa skipinu við yckur bræður.' 'I will exchange ships with you two brothers.' 'Kópa jord i jord,' to exchange farm for farm. Thus we are brought to the notion of changing expressed by the colloquial E. chop; to chop and change, to swap goods ; to coff—Yks., Sc. to coup s. s. ; horse-couper, a dealer in horses. See Chop.
Chear. Prov. Sp. cara, OFr. chiere. It. cera, the countenance ; Fr. chiere, the face, visage, countenance, favour, look, aspect of a man. Faire bonne chiere, to entertain kindly, welcome heartily, make good chear unto ; faire mauvaise chiere, to frown, lower, hold down the head ; belle chiere et cœur arriere, a willing look and unwilling heart.—Cot. Then as a kind reception is naturally joined with liberal entertainment, faire bonne or mauvaise chiere acquired the signification of good living or the reverse, and hence the E. chear in the sense of victuals, entertainment.
Cheat. Cheat in the old canting language of beggars and rogues was a thing of any kind. Thus grunting-chete was a pig ; crashing-chetes, teeth ; prattling-chete, the tongue, &c., and, from the frequency probably with which the word occurred, a cheater was equivalent to canter, a rogue or person who used the canting language. Hence to cheat, to act as a rogue.—Modern Slang. It. truffa, any cheating, canting or crossbiting trick ; truffatore, a cheater, cozener, a canting knave.—Fl.
Check. Fr. échec, a repulse, a metaphor taken from the game of chess, where the action of a player is brought to a sudden stop by receiving check to his king. To check an account, in the sense of ascertaining its correctness, is an expression derived from the practice of the King's Court of Exchequer, where accounts were taken by means of counters upon a checked cloth. See Chess.
Cheek.—Choke.—Chaps. The guttural sounds made by impeded exertions of the throat in coughing, retching, hawking, stuttering, laughing, are represented in widely separated languages by the syllables gag, gig, kak, kek, kik, kok, with a frequent change of the initial k into ch. We may cite Fin. kakaista, to vomit, Lap. kakot, to nauseate (to retch), kakkaset, to stutter. Fin. kikottaa, Lat. cachinnari, AS. ceahhetan, to laugh, Bav. gagkern, gagkezen, to cluck like a hen, to cough dry and hard, to stutter ; gigken, gigkezen, to make inarticulate sounds in retching, stuttering, giggling, Du. kichen, to gasp, cough, sob ; E. keck, to fetch the breath with difficulty, to clear the throat ; chuckle, to make inarticulate sounds in the throat from suppressed laughter or the like; Sw. kikna, to gasp, kikna af skratt, to choke with laughter. The Sw. kikna is identical with OE. cheken, to choke. 'Chekenyd or querkenyd, suffocatus.'—Pr. Pm. Thus we are brought to W. cegio, AS. ceocian, E. to choke; ON. koka, quoka, to swallow.

Again the root representing the sounds made by impeded guttural action passes on to signify the parts of the bodily frame by which the exertion is made, the throat, gullet, chops, jaws, cheeks. Sc. chouks, the throat, jaws; ON. kok, quok, the throat; W. ceg, throat, mouth; Sw. kek, käke, N. kjakje, jaw; Du. kaecke, cheek, jaw, gill of fish; AS. ceac, E. cheek.

The frequentative keckle, to make a noise in the throat by reason of difficulty of breathing (Bailey) leads on to Pl.D. käkel, the mouth, Fris. gaghel, the palate (Kil.), Lith. kaklas, the neck, AS. geagl, geahl, geafl, Fr. giffle, jouffle, jaw, jowl, chops.

In these latter forms we see the transition from a guttural to a labial termination, which in the case of cough has taken place in pronunciation although the final guttural is retained in writing. The imitative origin is witnessed by Galla cufä, to belch, cough, clear the throat, rattle in the throat.—Tutschek. Analogous forms are G. kopen, koppen, to belch, to gasp—Schmeller; E. to kep, to boken, i. e. when the breath is stopped, being ready to vomit—B.; Pl.D. gapen, kapen, Da. gabe, to gape; gab, the mouth or throat of an animal; Sw. gap, the throat; AS. ceaplas, ceaflas, E. chaps, the loose flesh about the jaws; Da. kjæbe, kjæve, the jaw; Wall. chiffe, cheek.

To Cheep. To make a shrill noise like a young chicken, squeak as a mouse, creak as shoes.—Jam. An imitative word, Cf. peep in the same sense. Lith. czypti, to cheep like a chicken or squeak like a mouse, whence czypulas, a chicken. Sc. cheiper, a cricket.

Cheese. AS. cese, cyse, OHG. chasi, G. käse, W. caws, Lat. caseus. The word may perhaps be explained from a Finnish source. Fin. kasa, a heap, whence kasa-leipa, old bread, bread kept for a year. The Lapps prepare much of their food, as meat and butter, by laying it in a heap till it becomes rancid or half decayed, acquiring a flavour of old cheese. This they call härsk. From them the practice seems to have been communicated to their Scandinavian neighbours, who treat their fish and coarser flesh in

this manner. ON. kæs, kös subliqui-dorum coacervatio, mollium congeries, veluti piscium, carnium, &c. Hence kasa, to heap up such things for the purpose of acidifying them; kasadr, kasulldin, subacidus, veteris casei sapore—Andersen; kæstr, incaseatus, made rancid by laying up in a covered heap, used especially of seals' flesh, which is not otherwise considered eatable.—Haldorsen.

The use of the word kæsir, rennet, shows that the Icelanders recognise the identity of the process going on in viands subjected to this process with that which takes place in the formation of cheese, though it is remarkable that they use a different word, ost, for cheese itself, which seems also derived from a Finnish source.

Chemistry. See Alchemy.

Chequer. See Chess.

Cherish. Fr. chérir, to hold dear, to treat with affection. Cher, Lat. carus, dear. W. caru, to love.

Cherry. Lat. cerasus. It. cireggia, cirieggia, Fr. cerise; G. kirsche.

Chesnut. Lat. castaneus; Fr. chastagne, châtaigne. Du. kastanie, G. kesten, E. chesten. — Kil. Hence chesten-nut, chestnut.

Chess. It. scacco, Sp. xaque, Fr. échec, G. schach, from the cry of check! (Pers. schach, king), when the king is put in the condition of being taken. As the board in this game is divided into a number of equal squares of opposite colours, things so marked are called chequered. Probably at one time the game was called the game of checks, subsequently corrupted into chess. It is sometimes written chests in OE.

Chest. AS. cist; G. kasten, kiste; Lat. cista. See Case.

Chevaux de frise. The name of Vriesse ruyters (Frisian horsemen) was given in Dutch to long beams stuck round with spikes and placed in the road to prevent the attack of cavalry. It would seem to have been a device of the Frisian peasants to supply the want of cavalry in their struggle for independence.

Chevisance. Achievement, acquisition, gain or profit in trade. Fr. chevir, to compass, prevail with, make an end, come to an agreement with. Chef, properly head, then end, accomplishment; achever, to bring to an end, to accomplish.

Chevron. The representation of two rafters in heraldry. Fr. chevron, Prov. cabrion, cabiron, Sp. cabrio, a rafter; cabrial, a beam, cabriones, wedges of wood to support the breech of a cannon. Walach. caferu, capriori, beam, rafter. W. cebr, Bret. kibr, rafter; Gael. cabar, deer's horn, antler, stake, pole, rafter; cabar beinne, mountain top; cabarach, branchy. It is remarkable that the rafters are also called corni la casa, horns of the house, in Walach., while the Magy. term is szaru fu, horn wood.

To Chew.—Chaw. It is shown under Cheek that the names of the gullet, mouth, jaw, chaps, are taken from the representation of the sounds made by guttural exertions. Among these the G. kauchen, keichen, lead through the synonymous E. kaw, to gasp for breath (Hal.), to Du. kauwe, kouwe, kuwe, the throat, cheek, jaw, chin, gills of a fish.—Kil. E. chaw-bone, machouere.—Palsgr. And hence, and not vice versâ, are formed Du. kaauwen, G. kauen, E. chew or chaw, to use the jaws. E. chavel, choule, a jaw, chol, the jole, head, jaws; chavel, to chew.—Hal.

* Chicane. Fr. chicaner, to pettifog, to contest, captiously taking every possible advantage without regard to substantial justice; chicoter, to contest about trifles.—Gattel. Probably from Fr. chic, chiquet, a little bit. De chic en chic, from little to little.—Cot. Payer chiquet à chiquet, by driblets.—Gattel. Chique, a lump, a quid of tobacco. It. cica cica, the least imaginable jot.—Fl. For the ultimate origin of the word see Doit, Mite.

Chick. Du. kieken, a chicken. The shrill cry of the young bird is represented by the syllable cheip, peep, or chick, from the first of which is Lith. czypulas, a chicken, from the second Lat. pipio, a young bird, and from the third E. chicken. Chikkyn as hennys byrdys, pipio, pululo.—Pr. Pm. Russ. chikat', to cheep or peep as a young bird; chij (Fr. j), a finch. Magy. pip, the cry of young birds; pipe, a chicken, gosling. Fin. tiukkata, tiukkua, to chirp or peep like a chicken, tiukka, the chirping of a sparrow; Magy. tyuk, a hen, doubtless originally a chicken; Lap. tiuk, the young of animals in general.

To Chide. AS. cidan, to scold, from the notion of speaking loud and shrill. Swiss kiden, to resound as a bell. Fin. kidata, kitista, strideo, crepo, queror, knarren, knirschen, klagend tönen.

Chief. Fr. chef, Prov. cap. It. capo, Walach. capu, pl. capete, Lat. caput, the head. The loss of the syllable *it* in CHIME the radical form is unusual. It reappears however in the derivatives capitano, chieftain, captain. The curtailed form agrees in a singular way with G. kopf, Du. kop, a cup, a head.

Child. AS. cild, G. kind. A similar interchange of n and l is seen in E. kilderkin, Du. kindeken, a small cask; OFr. aner, Fr. aller, to go. It is remarkable that the anomalous plural children agrees with the Du. kinderen.

Chill. The meaning is properly to shiver or cause to shiver. The ape that earst did nought but chill and quake, Now gan some courage unto him to take. Mother Hubbard. Brezza, chillness or shivering.—Fl. Chilly weather is what causes one to shiver: to feel chilly is to feel shivery. Now the notion of shivering or trembling is most naturally expressed by a vibrating, quivering sound which passes, when the vibrations become very rapid, into a continuous shrill sound. The usual sense of twitter is to warble like a bird, but it is explained by Bailey to quake or shiver with cold. To chatter represents the rapid shaking of the teeth with cold, or the broken noise of birds, or of people talking rapidly. To chitter, to chirp or twitter as birds—Hal., then as G. zittern, Du. citteren, to tremble with cold. To titter is a modification of the same word applied to the broken sounds of repressed laughter, while didder is to shiver or tremble. From the tingling sound of a little bell (Fr. grelot), greloter is to shiver for cold. On the same principle I regard the Ptg. chillrar, to twitter, Sp. chillar, Wall. chiler, to crackle, creak, twitter, hiss as meat on the gridiron, as pointing out the origin of the E. chill, signifying properly shivering, then cold. See Chim-mer, Chitter. The Pl.D. killen, to smart, has probably the same origin. 'De finger killet mi for kalte,' my finger tingles with cold. Du. killen, tintelen van koude.—Halm.

Chimb. Du. kimme, the rim or edge of a vase, or as E. chimb, the projecting ends of the staves above the head of a cask. Pl.D. k'imm s. s., also the horizon. W. cib, a cup; cibaw, to raise the rim, knit the brow; cib-led, of expanded rim; hyd-y-gib, to the brim. Fin. kippa, a cup.

Chime. Imitative of a loud clear sound. Chymyn or chenkyn with bellys. Tintillo.—Pr. Pm. Da. kime, to chime. Fin. kimia, acute, sonorous, kimista, acuté tinnio ; kimina, sonus acutus, clangor tinniens ; kummata, kumista, to sound, as a large bell ; kumina, reson-ance ; komia, sounding deep, as a bell ; kommata, komista, to sound deep or hollow.
Chimera. Gr. χίμαιρα, a goat, then the name of a fabulous monster part goat, part lion, killed by Bellerophon.
To Chimmer. Chymerynge, or chy-verynge or dyderinge. Frigutus.—Pr. Pm. This word affords a good illustra-tion of the mode in which the ideas of tremulous motion, sound, and light, are connected together. We have the radical application to a tremulous sound in Pol. szemrać, to murmur, rustle; E. simmer, to boil gently, to make a tremulous sound on beginning to boil. The desig-nation passes on to phenomena of sight and bodily movement in shimmer, a twinkling light, and chimmer, to tremble, which differ from each other only as shiver and the chyver of Pr. Pm. Com-pare also Walach. caperá, to simmer, vibrate, sparkle. See Bright, Chitter.
Chimney. Fr. cheminée. It. cam-minata, a hall ; Mid.Lat. caminata, an apartment with a fire-place, from Lat. caminus, a fire-place. Caminatum, fyr-hus.—Ælf. Gloss.
Chin. AS. cinne, Du. kinne. Kinne-backe, the jaw, cheek. Gr. γένυς, the jaw, chin ; γένειον, the chin ; Lat. gena, the cheek. Bret. gen, the cheek (jaw) ; genou (pl.), the mouth (jaws) ; genawi, to open the mouth.
Chin-cough. — Chink-cough. Sw. kik hosta, G. keich husten, Du. kieck hoest, kink hoest, the whooping cough, from the sharp chinking sound by which it is ac-companied. To chink with laughter, to lose one's breath with laughter and make a crowing sound in recovering breath.
Chine. Fr. eschine, the chine, back-bone ; eschinée (de porc), a chine (of pork) ; eschiner, to chine, to divide or break the back of.—Cot. It. schiena, schena, schina, Sp. esquena, Prov. esquina, the backbone ; Lat. spina, a thorn, also the spine or backbone from its pointed processes. The change from the sound of sp to sk is singular, as the p is preserved in It. spina, Fr. épine, a thorn. Diez de-rives from OHG. skina, a needle ; but skina applied to a bone signified the shin, and it is most unlikely that it would also have been used to designate the spine.
Chink. Primarily a shrill sound, as the chink of money, to chink with laugh-ter. Magy. tsengeni, tsongeni, tinnire. Then, in the same way that the word crack, originally representing the sound made by the fracture of a hard body, is applied to the separation of the broken parts, so also we find chink applied to the fissure arising from the fracture of a hard body, then to any narrow crack or fissure. AS. cinan, to gape, to chink. The same sound is represented in E. in-differently by the syllable clink or chink, and the Du. klincken, to clink or sound sharp, gives rise in like manner to the substantive klincke, a chink or fissure. In like manner E. chick, representing in the first instance a sharp sound, is pro-vincially used in the sense of a crack, a flaw—Hal. ; and from a similar sound represented by the syllable schrick, Bav. schricken, to crack as glass or earthen-ware ; schrick, a chap, cleft, chink.—Küttn.
Chintz. Hindost. chits, chhint.
Chip. See Chap, Chat.
Chirk. See Chark.
To Chirp. A parallel form with chirk, representing the shrill noise of birds or insects, all these imitative terms being liable to great variation in the final con-sonants. Lith. czirszkti, to chirp, twitter ; czirbti, to prattle ; czirpti, to creak, hiss ; G. zirpen, zirken, tschirpen, to chirp ; Sp. chirriar, to creak, chirp, hiss ; chirlar. It. ciarlare, to prattle ; Valentian charrar, Norman charer, to tattle, chatter ; E. dial. to chirre, to chirp. In the same sense, to chirm ; ' chirming tongues of birds.'—Phaer's Virg. Chyrme or chur, as birds do.—Huloet. in Hal.
Chisel. Fr. ciseau (for cisel), a sur-geon's lancet, also a chisel or graving iron.—Cot. It. cisello, Sp. cincel, Ptg. sizel. Fr. cisaille, clipping of coin. Sp. chischas, clashing of weapons.
Chit. See Chats.
To Chitter. To chirp or twitter. But she withal no worde may soune, But chitre as a bird jargowne.—Gower in Hal. Du. schetteren, stridere, crepare, dis-plodere, et garrire ; schetteringe, sonus vibrans, quavering of the voice.—Kil. From signifying a twittering sound chit-ter is applied to tremulous motion. Chyt-tering, quivering or shakyng for colde.—Huloet in Hal. It. squittire, to squeak or cry as a parrot, to hop or skip nimbly up and down.
Chitterling. 1. A frill to a shirt. We make of a French ruff an English chitterling. Gascoigne in Todd.
2. The small entrails of a hog, from their wrinkled appearance. G. krös, gekröse, a ruff or frill, also the mesentery or membrane which covers the bowels, from kraus, curly; kalbs gekröse, a calf's pluck or chaldron; gänse gekröse, a goose's giblets, called chitlers in the N. of E. Fr. freze, a ruff, a calf's chaldern; fresure, the inwards of an animal, pluck, haslets, &c. The origin of the word in the sense of a frill or wrinkled structure is chitter, to chirp or twitter, then to shiver, the ridges of a wrinkled surface being represented by the vibrations of sound or motion. In the same way the synonym frill is re- lated to Fr. friller, to shiver, chatter, or didder for cold, and W. frill, a twittering, chattering. Compare also Pol. kruszyć, to shiver; kruszki, ruffs, also calf's, lamb's pluck or gather, chawdron, &c. Walach. caperd, to palpitate; Lat. caperrâre, to wrinkle.
Chivalry. The manners and sentiments of the knightly class. Fr. chevalerie, from chevalier, a knight. See Cavalry.
Chives. The fine threads of flowers, or the little knobs which grow on the tops of those threads; chivets, the small parts of the roots of plants, by which they are propagated.— B. Fr. chippe, chiffe, a rag, jag ; E. chife, a fragment, chimp, a young shoot; chibble, to break off in small pieces; shive, a small slice or slip of anything; shiver, a scale or fragment; Pl.D. scheve, the shives or broken fragments of stalk that fall off in dressing flax or hemp; schevel-steen, G. schiefer, stone which splits off in shives or shivers, slate ; ON. skifa, to cleave ;—all seem developments of the same radical image. See Chats.
* Chives are also a kind of small onion, the eatable part of which consists of the young fine leaves, and in this sense the word is more likely to be from Lat. cepa, an onion. Fr. cive, civette, a chive, scallion or unset leek.'—Cot. Verie comme chives, as green as leeks.—Body and Soul.
Chock-full. — Chuck-full. Swab. schoch, a heap, g'schochet voll, full to overflowing, heaped measure, chock full.—Schmid. In the same dialect schoppen is to stuff, to stop; geschoppt voll, crammed full.
Choir.—Chorus. Gr. χόρος, a company of singers or dancers, specially with an application to theatrical performances, whence Lat. chorus, and It. coro, Fr. chœur, the quire or part of the church appropriated to the singers.
To Choke.—See Cheek.
Choleric.—Cholera. Gr. χολέρα, a malady the symptoms of which are connected with the bile, from χολή, 1. bile, 2. anger, wrath, whence choleric, of an angry disposition.
* To Choose.—Choice. AS. ceosan, Du. kiezen, keuren, koren, Goth. kiusan, kausjan, G. kiesen, köhren, Prov. causir, Fr. choisir, to choose. The primary meaning is doubtless to taste, then to try, prove, approve, select. ' Thaiize ni kausjand dauthaus,' who shall not taste death. —Mark ix. 1. ' Gagga kausjan thans '—I go to prove them.—Luc. xiv. 19. The original meaning is preserved in G. weinkieser, a wine taster, and in kosten, to taste, to experience, to try. OHG. kiusan, to prove, to try; arkiusan, to choose; korôn, to taste, try, prove. Swiss kust, gust, taste, gusten, kustigen, to taste, to try, lead us on to Lat. gustare, Gr. γεύω, γεύσμα, to taste. Equivalents in the Slavonic languages are Pol. kusić, to tempt, try. Boh. okusyti, to taste, try, experience ; Russ. wkusit', prikushat', to taste ; Serv. kushati, to taste, to try. As kushnuti, kushevati, in the same language, signify to kiss, in analogy with the use of smack in the sense of kiss as well as taste, it is probable that the root kus. of the foregoing terms represents the smack of the lips in kissing or tasting.
Choice is probably direct from Fr. choix.
To Chop. The syllable chap or chop represents the sound of a sudden blow; Sc. chap hands, to strike hands ; to chap at a door; to chap, to hack, cut up into small pieces. Chap, chaup, choppe, a blow.—Jam. Hence to chop is to do anything suddenly, as with a blow, to turn. A greyhound chops up a hare when it catches it unawares ; to chop up in prison, to clap up—Hal. ; the wind chops round when it makes a sudden turn to a different quarter.
From the notion of turning round the word chop passes to the sense of exchanging, an exchange being the transfer of something with the return of an equivalent on the other side. Thus we speak of chopping and changing ; to chop horses with one, to exchange horses. The Sc. and N. of E. coup, Warwickshire coff, ON. kaup, keypa, are used in the same sense. ' Síðast bjó hann at Hólmi þvíat hann keypti við Hólmstarra bæði löndum ok konum ok lausa fé öllu.' At last he dwelt at Holm because he and Holmstarra had chopped both lands and wives and all their moveables. ' Enn Sigríður sem hann átti áður hengdi sig í hofinu þvíat hun villdi eigi manna-kaupin.' But Sigrid whom he before had to wife hanged herself in the temple, because she would not endure this husband chopping.— Landnamabok, p. 49.

Thus chop is connected with G. kaufen, E. cheap, chapman, &c. In Sc. coup the original sense of turning is combined with that of trafficking, dealing. To coup, to overturn, overset.—Jam. 'The whirling stream will make our boat to coup, i. e. to turn over.' 'They are forebuyers of quheit, bear and aits, copers and turners there-of in merchandise.'—Jam.

Horse-couper, cow-couper, one who buys and sells horses or cows; soul-couper, a trafficker in souls. To turn a penny is a common expression for making a penny by traffic. The nasalisation of chap or chop in the sense of exchanging would give rise to the It. cambiare, cangiare, and we actually find champman for chapman, a merchant, in Chaucer. See Change.

To Chop logick. Du. kappen (to chop) in thieves' language signified to speak. Borgoens kappen, to cant, to speak thieves' slang.—P. Marin.

Chopino. Sp. chapin, high clog, slipper; chapineria, shop where clogs and pattens are sold. From the sound of a blow represented by the syllable chap, chop, as Du. klompe, klopper, clogs, from kloppen, to knock, because in clogs or wooden shoes one goes clumping along, where it will be observed that the initial kl of kloppen corresponds to ch of chopino, as in the examples mentioned under Chape.

Chord. Gr. χορδή, the string of a musical instrument; originally, the intestine of an animal, of which such strings are made.

Chough. A jackdaw; AS. ceo; OE. kowe, monedula.—Nominale in Nat. Ant. Du. kauwe, kae; Lith. kowe; Sax. kaycke; Picard. cauc, cauvette; Fr. choucas, chouquette, chouette, whence E. chuet.

Peace, chuet, peace.—Shakespeare. This latter is the same word with the It. civetta, applied to an owl in that language. The origin of all these words is an imitation of the cry of the bird, equivalent to the E. kaw. See Chaff.

To Chouse. From the Turkish Chiaus, a messenger or envoy. In 1609 Sir Robert Shirley, who was about to come to England with a mission from the Grand Seignor and the King of Persia, sent before him a Chiaus, who took in the Turkey and Persia merchants in a way that obtained much notoriety at the time. Hence to chiaus became a slang word for to defraud.—Gifford's Ben Jonson, 4. 27. In the Alchemist, which was written in 1610, we find the following passage :
Dap. And will I tell then? by this hand of flesh Would it might never write good court-hand more If I discover. What do you think of me, That I am a chiaus?
Face. What's that?
Dap. The Turk was here As one should say, Do you think I am a Turk?—
Face. Come, noble Doctor, pray thee let's prevail— You deal now with a noble gentleman. One that will thank you richly, and he is no chiaus— Slight, I bring you No cheating Clim o' the Cloughs.—Alchemist. We are in a fair way to be ridiculous. What think you, Madam, chiaus'd by a scholar?—Shirley in Gifford.

Chrism.—Chrisom. Fr. chrisme, Gr. χρίσμα, consecrated oil to be used in baptism; Fr. cresmeau, the crisome wherewith a child is anointed, or more properly the cloth or christening cap that was put on the head of the child as soon as it had been anointed.—Cot.

-chron-. — Chronicle. Gr. χρόνος, time; τὰ χρονικά, Fr. chroniques, E. chronicles, journals of events in reference to the times in which they happened. Anachronism, an offence against the fitness of times.

Chrysalis. Lat. chrysalis (Plin.), Gr. χρυσαλίς, doubtless from some connection with χρυσός, gold.

Chub.—Chevin. A fish with a thick snout and head. Fr. chevane, cheviniau. Confounded with the bullhead, a small fish with a large head. Mid.Lat. capito, capitanus, caphatenus, cavena, whence the Fr. chevane, E. chevin. G. forms are kaulhaupt (club-head, whence E. gull; capitone, a bullhead, gull, or miller's thumb—Fl.), kolbe (club), kobe, koppe, whence apparently the E. chub.—Dief. Sup. Quabbe, quappe, gobio capitatus, capito.—Kil.

* Chubby. E. dial. cob, a lump or piece; chump, a thick piece. ON. kubbr, Sw. dial. kubb, a stump, short piece; kubbug, fat, plump, thick-set.

Chuck.—Chuckstone. A sharp sound like the knocking of two hard substances together is imitated by the syllables clack, chack, cak, clat, chat, as in Fr. claquer, to clack, chatter; Wall. caker, to strike in the hand, the teeth to chatter; Fr. caqueter, to chatter, prattle; E.

clatter, &c. N. kakka, klakka, to strike a resounding object, as a board.—Aasen. In Sc. we have to chack, to make a noise like two stones knocking together.
Some's teeth for cold did chack and chatter. Cleland in Jam.
Hence the name of the wheatear or stone-chat (a bird making a noise of that description), in Sc. chack or stane-chacker.
This imitation of the noise of pebbles knocking together has very generally given rise to the designation of a pebble or small stone, as in E. chack-stone, Sc. chuckie-stane. The Turkish has chagh-lamak, to make a rippling noise, as water running over rocks or stones, chakil, a pebble; Gr. καχλαίνω, to move with a rattling noise like pebbles rolled on the beach; κάχληξ, χάλιξ, Lat. calx, calculus, a pebble. To chuck one under the chin is to give him a sudden blow, so as to make the jaw chack or snap. To chuck in the sense of throwing may be from the notion of a sudden jerk.
To Chuckle. See Cheek.
Chuff.—Chuffy. Churlish, surly, an old chuff, a miser. Probably from It. ciuffo, ceffo, the snout of an animal, and thence an ugly face; far ceffo, to make a wry face; ceffata, ceffore, a douse on the chops. Wall. chife, chofe (Grandgagnage), OFr. giffe, giffle, cheek, blow on the cheeks; Wall. chofu, Fr. joffu, joufflu, chuffy, fat-cheeked, swollen or puffed up in the face.—Cot. AS. ceaplas, ceaflas, geaflas, chaps, jaws. See Cheek.
Chump.—Chunk. A log of wood, the thick end of anything, a lump. See Cob.
Church. The derivation from κυριακόν, the Lord's house, has been impugned because it is not understood how a Greek term should have made its way among Gothic nations. It is certain, however, that κυριακόν was used in the sense of church. The canon of the sixth Council prescribes,— 'ὅτι οὐ δεῖ ἐν τοῖς κυριακοῖς, ἢ ἐν ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις τὰς λεγομένας ἀγάπας ποιεῖν.' And Zonaras in commenting on the passage says that the name of κυριακόν is frequently found in the sense of a church, although only this canon directly distinguishes ἐκκλησία and κυριακόν, ' but I think,' he adds, ' that the ἢ is not there used disjunctively, but by way of explanation.'—Quoted by Max Müller in Times Newsp. As AS. cyrice is confessedly the very form to which the Greek would have given rise, it is carrying scruples to an extravagant length to doubt the identity of the two words, because we do not know how the Greek name came to be employed instead of the Latin equivalent dominicum, whence Ir. domhnach, a church.
Churl. AS. ceorl, a man, countryman, husbandman. ON. karl, a man, male person, an old man. Du. kaerle, a man, a husband, a rustic; G. kerl, a fellow.
Churn. ON. kjarni, G. kern, the kernel, pith, marrow, flower, or choice part of a thing; whence ON. kirna, Fris. kernjen, to churn, i. e. to separate the kernel of the milk, or, as Epkema explains it, to cause the milk to grain, to form grains of butter. Da. dial. kiörne, to separate the grains of barley from the chaff. Somerset kerti, to turn from blossom to fruit.—Jennings.
-cid-. -cis-. Lat. cado, casum (in comp. -cid-), to fall; accido, to fall at or on, to happen; incido, to fall upon; decido, to fall from, whence deciduous (of trees), whose leaves fall from them.
-cide-. -cise. Lat. cædo, cæsum (in comp. -cido, -cisum), to cut; decide, to cut off, to determine; incision, a cutting in; circumcision, a cutting round, &c.
Cider. Fr. cidre, from Lat. sicera, Gr. σικέρα, as Fr. ladre from Lazare. Sicera-tores, i. e. qui cervisiam vel pomarium sive piratiam facere sciant.—Charta A.D. 1106 in Mur. Diss. 24.
Cieling. See Ceiling.
Cincture. Lat. cinctura (cingo, pp. cinctus, to gird, tie about), a girding on, thence a belt.
* Cinder. The spelling of cinder has arisen from the erroneous supposition that the word is an adoption of Fr. cendre, from Lat. cinis, -eris, dust, ashes, with which it has really no connection. It should be written sinder, corresponding to G. sinter, Du. sindel, sintel, ON. sindr, signifying in the first place the brilliant sparks which are driven off when white-hot iron is beaten on the anvil, then the black scales to which they turn when cold, and the slag or dross of iron of which they are composed, and from analogy is applied to the unconsumed residue of burnt coals. Du. sindel is rendered by Kil. scoria, spuma metalli, but according to Weiland sintel (as it is now pronounced) is used as E. cinders for the residue of stone coal. The origin of the word is seen in ON. sindra, to sparkle, to throw out sparks, a parallel form with tyndra, Sw. tindra, to sparkle. In Germany. Zunder is used as a synonym with sinter for smiths' scales or cinder.

See Tinder. ON. sindri, a flint for striking fire.
Cion.—Scion. Fr. scion, cion, a young and tender plant, a shoot, sprig, twig.—Cot. The proper sense is a sucker, as in Sp. chupon, a sucker or young twig shooting from the stock, from chupar, to suck. The radical identity of the Fr. and Sp. forms is traced by Gr. σίφων, a tube or hollow reed (from the root sup, sip, suck), also a waterspout (sucking up the water of the sea), compared with It. sione, a kind of pipe, gutter, or quill to draw water through—Fl. ; a whirlwind.
—Alt. In Fr. cion, Sp. chupon, and E. scion or sucker, the young shoot is conceived as sucking up the juices of the parent plant.
* Cipher. Fr. chiffre, It. cifra, Arab. sifr. Originally the name of the figure marking a blank in decimal arithmetic. Then transferred to the other numeral figures. From Arab. sifr, empty (Dozy); safira, to be empty.—Golius.
Circle.—Circuit. Gr. κρίκος, Κίρκος, a ring, circle, clasp. Lat. circa, around, circulus, a circle. The Gr. κρίκος differs only in the absence of the nasal from ON. kringr, hringr, a circle, a ring. In the latter language kring is used in composition as Lat. circum. ON. kringla, a circle. See Crankle.
Circum-. Lat. circa, circum, about, around. See Circle.
-cis-. See -cid-.
* Cistern. Lat. cisterna, a reservoir for water. Probably from Lat. cista, a chest, as caverna from cavus. Comp. G. wasserkasten (water chest), a cistern. On the other hand a more characteristic explanation might be found in Bohem. čisté, clean (the equivalent of the Lat. castus), whence čistiti, to cleanse, and cisterna, a cleansing place, a cistern. So Lat. lucerna, the place of a light. AS. cern, ern, a place ; domern, a judgment place ; hiddern, a hiding-place, &c. See Chaste.
Citadel. It. cittadella, dim. of città, cittade, a city. A fort built close to a city, either for the purpose of defence or of control.
Cite. -cite. Lat. cieo, citum, and, in the frequentative form, cito, to make to go, stimulate, excite, to set in motion by means of the voice, to call by name, to summon or call on, to appeal, to mention, to cry out. Gr. κίω, to go.
Hence Incite, Excite, Recite.
Citron. Lat. citrus, a lemon tree.

City.—Civil. Lat. civis, a citizen ; civilis, belonging to cities or social life ; civitas. It. città, Fr. cité, a city.
To Clack. The syllables clap, clack, clat, are imitative of the noise made by two hard things knocking together. Hence they give rise to verbs expressing action accompanied by such kinds of noise. Fr. claquer, to clack, clap, clatter, crash, crack, creak—Cot. ; claquer les dents, to gnash the teeth, to chatter ; claquet de moulin, the clapper or clack of a mill hopper. E. clack-dish, or clap-dish, a kind of rattle, formerly used by beggars to extort attention from the by-passers ; clack, clack-box, clap, clapper, the tongue.—Hal. ON. klak, clangor avium ; Du. klacken, to strike, or split with noise, smack, lash ; klak, a split, crack, sounding blow, sound of blow, clapping of hands ; klacke, a whip, a rattle ; Fr. claquer, to clap at a theatre. Du. klap, crack, sound, chatter ; klappe, a rattle ; klappen, to chatter, prattle. Bohem. klekotati, to cluck, rattle, babble ; klepati, klopati, to knock, to chatter, prattle. Du. klateren, to clatter, rattle ; klater-busse, klacke-busse, a pop-gun.
To Claim. Fr. clamer, to call, cry, claim. Lat. clamare, to call. From the imitation of a loud outcry by the syllable clam. To clam a peal of bells is to strike them all at once. ON. glamm, tinnitus ; Dan. klemte, to toll ; Gael. glam, to bawl, cry out ; glambar, clambar, Dan. klammer, Gael. clamras, uproar, outcry, vociferation. A parallel root is slam, with an initial s instead of c, as in slash compared with clash. Lap. slam, a loud noise ; uksa slamketī, the door was slammed ; slamem, ruin, fall.
Clam.—Clamp.—Clump. The idea of a lump or thick mass of anything is often expressed by a syllable representing the noise made by the fall of a heavy body. We may cite W. clob, a knob, a boss ; clobyn, a lump ; Lat. globus, a ball, sphere ; gleba, a clod ; Russ. kluč, a ball ; Pol. kłąb, a ball, lump, mass ; G. Kloben, a lump, bunch ; Sw. klabb, klubb, a block, log, trunk, lump of wood ; or with the nasal, Sw. klamp, klump, klimp, a block, lump, clot ; ON. klambr, klumbr, a lump ; Du. klompe, a clod, clog, lump ; E. clump, W. clamp, a mass, bunch, lump. The notion of a lump, mass, cluster, naturally leads to that of a number of things sticking together, and hence to the principle of connection between the elements of which the mass is composed. We accordingly find the roots clab, clamp, clam and their immediate modifications applied to express the ideas of cohesion, compression, contraction. Thus we have G. kloben, a vice or instrument for holding fast, the staple of a door; kleben, to cleave, stick, cling, take hold of; Du. klobber-saen, coagulated cream, cream run to lumps; klebber, klibber, klubber, birdlime, gum, substances of a sticky nature; E. dial, clibby, sticky—Hal.; Sw. klibb, viscosity; klibba, to glue, to stick to. The E. clamp designates anything used for the purpose of holding things together; Du. klampen, to hook things together, hold with a hook or buckle, hold, seize, apprehend; klampe, klamme, hook, claw, cramp, buckle; klamp, klam, tenacious, sticky, and hence moist, clammy. To clam, to stick or glue.—B. E. dial, to clam, clem, to pinch, and hence to pinch with hunger, to starve, also to clog up, to glue, to daub—Hal.; Du. klemmen, to pinch, compress, strain; klem-vogel, or klamp-vogel, a bird of prey, a hawk. AS. clam, bandage, bond, clasp, prison. G. klamm, pinching, strait, narrow, pressed close or hard together, solid, massy, viscous, clammy; klammer, a cramp, brace, cramp-iron, holdfast.

To Clamber.—Climb. These words are closely connected with clamp. To clamber is properly to clutch oneself up, to mount up by catching hold with the hands or claws. G. klammern, to fasten with cramp-irons, to hold fast with the hands or claws; Dan. klamre, to clamp, to grasp. In like manner Du. klemmen, to hold tight, to pinch, klemmen, klimmen, to climb. OE. cliver, E. dial, claver, a claw; Dan. klavre, to claw oneself up, to climb. G. kleben, to cleave or stick, Swiss kläbern, klebern, to climb; Bav. klatten, a claw, G. klette, a burr, Swiss kletten, G. klettern, to climb, clamber. Dan. klynge, to cling, cluster, crowd; klynge sig op, to clutch or cling oneself up, to climb. The Fr. grimper, to climb, is a nasalised form of gripper, to seize, gripe, grasp.

Clamour. The equivalent of Lat. clamor, but perhaps not directly from it, as the word is common to the Celtic and Gothic races. Sw. klammer, Gael, clam-ras, clambar, glambar, uproar, brawl. See Claim.

Clamp. See Clam.

Clan. A small tribe subject to a single chief. From Gael. clann, children, descendants, i. e. descendants of a common ancestor. cf. plant (which corresponds regularly to Gael. c), offspring, children. The same word is probably exhibited in the Lat. clientes, who occupied a position with respect to their patronus, closely analogous to that of the Scottish clansmen towards their chief. Manx cloan, children, descendants; clienney, of the children.

Clandestine. Lat. clandestinus, from clam, privately, and that from celo, to conceal. The root which gives rise to Lat. celo produces Fin. salata, to hide, conceal, whence sala, anything hidden, of which the locative case, salaan, is used in the sense of secretly, in a hidden place, as the Lat. clam. Salainen, clandestine.

Clang.—Clank.—Clink. These are imitations of a loud, clear sound, adopted in many languages. Lat. clangor, the sound of the trumpet; G. klang, a sound, tone, resonance; klingen, to jingle, clink, tingle, tinkle, sound. E. clang, a loud sound; clank, a sound made by a lighter object; clink, a sound made by a still smaller thing; the clank of irons, clink of money; Du. klank, sound, accent, rumour.—Halma. Gael, gliong, tingle, ring as metal, clang.

Clap. An imitation of the sound made by the collision of hard or flat things, as the clapping of hands. Dan. klappre, to chatter (as the teeth with cold); G. klappen, to do anything with a clap; klopfen, to knock, to beat. Du. klappen, kleppen, to clap, rattle, chatter, beat, sound; kleppe, klippe, a rattle; kleppe, a whip, a trap, a noose; klepel, kluppel, a stick, club; Bohem. klepati, to knock, tattle, chatter, tremble; Russ. klepanie, beating, knocking. To clap in E. is used in the sense of doing anything suddenly, to clap on, clap up.

Clapper. A clapper of conies, a place underground where rabbits breed.—B. Fr. clapier, a heap of stones, &c., whereunto they retire themselves, or (as our clapper) a court walled about and full of nests of boards and stones, for tame conies.—Cot. Lang, clap, a stone; clapas, clapié, a heap of stones or other things piled up without order. ' Pourta las peiros as clapas,' to take coals to Newcastle. Hence the Fr. clapier, originally a heap of large stones, the cavities of which afforded rabbits a secure breeding place, then applied to any artificial breeding place for rabbits. The proper meaning of the foregoing clap is simply a lump, from the W. clap, clamp, a lump, mass, the primary origin of which is preserved in Lang. clapa, clopa, to knock. Prov. clap, a heap, mass.—Rayn.
Claret. Fr. vin clairet, vin claret, claret wine.—Cot. Commonly made, he tells us, of white and red grapes mingled together. From clairet, somewhat clear, i. e. with a reddish tint, but not the full red of ordinary red wine. Eau clairette, a water made of aquavitæ, cinnamon, and old red rose-water. Du. klaeret, vinum helvolum, subrubidum, rubellum. It. chiarello.—Kil.

Clarion.—Clarinet. Sp. clarin, trum-pet, stop of an organ. It. chiarino, a clairon of a trumpet—Fr. clairon, a clarion, a kind of small, straight-mouthed, and shrill-sounding trumpet. Fr. clair. It. chiaro clear. Sp. clarinado, applied to animals having bells in their harness.

Clash. Imitative of the sound of weapons striking together. Du. kletse, ictus resonans, fragor; Lang. clas, the sound of bells rung in a volley to give notice of the passage of a corpse; sonna de classes, to ring in such a manner for the dead. In E. it is called clamming. Fr. glas, noise, crying, bawling, also a knell for the dead. G. klatschen, an imitation of the sound made by striking with the hand against a partition, wall, &c. If such a blow sound finer or clearer it is called klitsch; klitsch-klatsch! pitsch-patsch!—thwick-thwack.—Küttner. Klatsch-büchse, a pop-gun; klatsche, a lash, flap, clap; klatschen, to do anything with a sound of the foregoing description, to patter, chatter, clatter, blab. Pol. klask! plask! thwick, thwack; klaskad, to clap; klask bicza, the cracking of a whip. It. chiasso, fracas, uproar; Sp. chasquear, to crack a whip, &c. Gr. Κλάζω, to clash as arms.

Clasp. Related to clip as grasp to grip or gripe. But clasp or clapse, as it is written by Chaucer, is probably by direct imitation from the sound of a metal fastening, as we speak of the snap of a bracelet for a fastening that shuts with a snapping sound, or as G. schnalle, a clasp, buckle, locket of a door, from schnallen, to snap. Du. gaspe, ghespe, fibula, ansa.

Class. Lat. classis, a distribution of things into groups. Originally clasis. Identical with ON. klasi, Sw. Dan. klase, a bunch, assembly, cluster. Eya-klasi, insularum nexus; skeria-klasi, syrtium junctura. Du. klos, klot, globus, sphæra.—Kil.

Clatter. From the imitation of the sound of a knock by the syllable clat, equivalent to clack or clap. Du. klateren, to rattle; klaterbusse, as G. klatsch-büchse, a pop-gun.

Clause. Lat. clausula, an ending, thence a definite head of an edict or law, a complete sentence. From claudo, clausum, to shut, to end.

Clavicle. The collar-bone, from the resemblance to a key, Lat. clavis, as Mod.Gr. Κλειδί, a key; κλειδιά τοῦ σώματος, the collar-bone.

Claw.—Clew. The origin of both these words seems to be a form of the same class with W. cloi, a lump; Russ. cluy, a ball, pellet; Lat. globus, a sphere; gleba, a clod. The b readily passes into an m on the one hand, and through v into a w or u on the other. Thus from Lat. globus we have glomus in the restricted sense of a ball of thread, and the same modification of meaning is expressed by the Du. klauw, klouwe (Kil.), E. clew. We have explained under Clamp the way in which the notion of a mass or solid lump is connected with those of cohesion, compression, contraction. Thus from clamp, climp, clump, in the sense of a mass or lump, we pass to the E. clamp, to fasten together; Du. klampe, klamme, a buckle, hook, nail, claw (what fastens together, pulls, seizes); klampvoghel, a hawk, a bird with powerful talons. In the same way must be explained the use of the Du. klauwe, klouwe, in the sense both of a ball and also of a claw. The form clew, which signifies a ball in E., is used in Sc. in the sense of a claw. To clew up a sail is to fasten it up, to draw it up into a bunch. To clew, to cleave, to fasten.—Jam. Analogous forms are the Du. kleeven, klijven, kleuen, whence kleuer, ivy, from clinging to the tree which supports it. In the same way is formed the OE. cliver, a claw.
Ich habbe bile stif and stronge And gode clivers sharp and longe.
Owl and Nightingale, 269.
A cliver or claw is that by which we cleave to, clew or fasten upon a thing.
With mys he wes swa wmbesete— He mycht na way get sawfté, Na with stavis, na with stanis, Than thai wald clew upon his banis.
Wyntoun in Jam.
The root appears in Lat. under three modifications; clava, a club or massy stick, clavus, a nail, from its use in fastening things together, and clavis, a key, originally a crooked nail. So Pol. klucz, a key, kluczka, a little hook; Serv.

klutch, a key, hook, bend in a stream, identical in sound and nearly so in mean-ing with the E. dutch, a claw or talon.

Clay.—Clag.—Claggy. AS. clag, sticky earth, clay ; E. dial. to clag or clog, to stick or adhere ; claggy, cloggy, cledgy, sticky ; clags, clogs ; Da. klaeg, kleg, vis-cous, sticky ; klag, kleg, kleg, mud, loam. See Clog.

Clean. The proper meaning of the word is shining, polished, as Lat. nitidus, clean, from nitere, to shine. ON. glan, shine, polish ; Gael. glan, radiant, bright, clear, clean, pure ; W. glan, clean, pure. The word is fundamentally connected with forms like the ON. glitta, Sc. gleit, to shine ; ON. glitnir, splendid ; G. glatt, polished, sleek, smooth, pretty, neat. The introduction of the nasal gives rise to forms like Sc. glint, glent, a flash, glance ; Da. glindse, glandse, to glitter, shine ; whence it is an easy step to forms ending in a simple nasal, as ON. and Celtic glan.

Clear. Lat. clarus, ON. klar, clear, clean, pure. This is probably one of the words applicable to the phenomena of sight, that are primarily derived from those of hearing, as explained under Brilliant. G. klirren, Dan. klirre, to clink, jingle, clash, give a shrill sound ; Ir. glòr, a noise, voice, speech ; glòram, to sound or make a noise ; glòr-mhòr, glorious, famous, celebrated ; clòr, clear, neat, clean.

Cleat. A piece of wood fastened on the yard-arm of a ship, to keep the ropes from slipping off the yard ; also pieces of wood to fasten anything to.—B. A piece of iron worn on shoes by country people. Probably a modification of the word clout. Du. kluit, kluyte, a lump, pellet. AS. cleot, clut, a plate, clout. A clate is the thin plate of iron worn as a shoe by racers. The cleats of the yard-arms are probably so named from a similar piece of iron at the extremity of an axletree, provincially termed clout. The clout of iron nailed on the end of an axletree.—Torriano, Axletree clouts.—Wilbraham.

To Cleave. This word is used in two opposite senses, viz. 1. to adhere or cling to, and, 2. to separate into parts. In the former sense we have G. kleben, Du. kleeven, klijven, to stick to, to fasten ; E. dial. clibby, Du. kleevig, kleverig, sticky. From clob, a lump, a mass. See Clam.
2. The double signification of the word seems to arise from the two opposite ways in which we may conceive a cluster to be composed, either by the coherence of a number of separate objects in one, or by the division of a single lump or block into a number of separate parts. Thus from G. kloben, a mass, lump, or bundle (ein kloben flachs, a bunch of flax), kloben, klieben, to cleave. When an object is simply cleft, the two parts of it cleave together. Du. klove, a cleft, kloven, chaps in the skin, kloven, klieven, to chink, cleave, split.—Kil. The Dan. uses klæbe in the sense of adhering, kløve in that of splitting. The Dan. klov, a tongs, bears nearly the same relation to both senses. Sw. klåfva, G. kloben, a vice, a billet of wood cleft at one end. The designation may either be derived from the instrument being used in pinch-ing, holding together, or from being di-vided into two parts. Sc. cloff, a fissure, the fork of the body, or of a tree. The same opposition of meanings is found in other cases, as the Du. klincke, a cleft or fissure, and Dan. klinke, to rivet or fasten together the parts of a cracked dish ; Du. klinken, to fasten together ; E. clench. Compare also Fr. river, to fasten, to clench, E. rivet, and E. rive, to tear or cleave asunder, rift, a cleft.

Cleft. Du. kluft, Sw. klyft, a fissure or division ; G. kluftholz, cloven wood. See Cleave.

Clement.—Clemency. Lat. clemens, calm, gentle, merciful.

To Clench.—Clinch. Sw. klinka, G. klinken, to clinch ; OHG. gaklankjan, con-serere ; antklankjan, to unloose (the strap of one's shoe) ; Bav. klank, klänkelein, a noose, loop ; Du. klinken, to fasten. 'Andromeda was aan rots geklonken,' was nailed to a rock. Omklinken, to clinch a nail.—Halma. Da. klinke, a rivet. The word may be explained from the original klinken, to clink or sound, in two ways, viz. : as signifying something done by the stroke of a hammer. Du. klink, a blow ; dat was en bewys van klink, that was a striking proof, that was a clincher. Die zaak is zô geklonken, the business is finished off, is fast and sure. Or the notion of fastening may be at-tained indirectly through the figure of a door-latch. G. klinke, Fr. clanche, clinquet (Cot.), the latch of a door, seem formed from the clinking of the latch, as Fr. cliquet, a latch, from cliquer, cliqueter, to clack or rattle. And the latch of a door affords a very natural type of the act of fastening.

To Clepe. To call. From clap, the sound of a blow. Du. kleppen, crepare, crepitare, pulsare, sonare. De klok klep-pen, to sound an alarm; klappen, to clap, crack, crackle, to talk as a parrot, to tattle, chat, chatter, to confess; G. klaffen, to prate, chatter, babble, to tell tales. AS. cleopian, clypian, to cry, call, speak, say. Sc. clep, to tattle, chatter, prattle, call, name.
Ne every appel that is faire at iye Ne is not gode, what so men clappe or crie. Chaucer.

Clerk. — Clerical. — Clergy. Lat. clerus, the clergy; clericus, Sp. clerigo, one of the clergy, a clerk; clerecia, the clergy, which in Mid.Lat. would have been clericia, whence Fr. clergé, as from clericio, one admitted to the tonsure, Fr. clerigon, clerjon. The origin is the Gr. κλῆρος, a lot, from the way in which Mat-thias was elected by lot to the apostle-ship. In I Peter v. 3, the elders are ex-horted to feed the flock of God, 'not as being lords over God's heritage,' μὴδ᾽ ὡς κατακυριεύοντες τῶν κλήρων, 'neither as having lordship in the clergie.'—Wiclif in R.

Clever. Commonly derived from de-liver, which is used in Scotch and N. E. in the sense of active, nimble. The sound of an initial dl and gl or cl are easily confounded. But the Dan. dial. has klöver, klever, in precisely the same sense as the E. clever. Det er en klöver kerl, that is a clever fellow. Klöver i munden, ready of speech. The word is probably derived from the notion of seizing, as Lat. rapidus from rapio, or Sc. gleg, quick of perception, clever, quick in motion, expeditious, from Gael glac, to seize, to catch. The Sc. has also cleik, clek, cleuck, cluke, clook (identical with E. clutch), a hook, a hold, claw or talon; to clek or cleik, to catch, snatch, and hence cleik, cleuch, lively, agile, clever, dexterous, light-fingered. One is said to be cleuch of his fingers who lifts a thing so cleverly that bystanders do not observe it.—Jam. Now the OE. had a form, cliver, a claw or clutch, exactly corresponding to the Sc. cleik, cluik, whence perhaps the adjective clever in the sense of snatching, catching, in the same way as the Sc. cleik, cleuch, above mentioned.
The bissart (buzzard) bissy but rebuik Scho was so cleverus of her cluik, His legs he might not longer bruik, Scho held them at ane hint. Dunbar in Jam.

Clew.—Clue. A ball of thread; ori-ginally from clob (extant in W. clob, a hump, Lat. globus, a sphere, &c.), a lump. Hence Lat. glomus, a ball of twine, Du. klouwe, a ball of yarn, a clew. See Claw, Clam.

Click.—Clicket. Click represents a thinner sound than clack, as a click with the tongue, the click of a latch or a trigger. It is then applied to such a short quick movement as produces a click or a snap, or an object character-ized by a movement of such a nature. Du. klikklakken, to clack, click; klikker, a mill-clack; kliket, klinket, a wicket or little door easily moving to and fro; Fr. cliquer, to clack, clap, clatter, click it, cliquette, a clicket or clapper, a child's rattle, or clack; cliquet, the knocker of a door, a lazar's clicket or clapper.—Cot.

Rouchi cliche, a latch; clichet, a tumbril, cart that tilts over, and (with the nasal) clincher, to move, to stir, corresponding to Fr. cligner, to wink. Boh. klika, a latch, a trigger, G. klinke, klinge, a latch.

We have the notion of a short quick movement in E. dial. click, clink, a smart blow (Mrs Baker); cleke, click, to snatch, catch, seize (Hal.); Norm. clicher, frap-per rudement une personne.—Vocab. de Brai.

Client. See Clan.

Cliff. AS. clif, clyf, littus, ripa, rupes; scoren clif, abrupta rupes; cliof, clif-stanas, cautes, precipices, from clifian, cliofian, to cleave. ON. klif, a cleft in a rock; hamraklif, syn. with hamarskard, a cleft or rift in a (hamarr) high rock, precipice. ON. skard, it must be ob-served, is NE. scar, a cliff. Bav. stein-kluppen, cleft in a rock. Du. kleppe, klippe, rock, cliff; cave; Da. klippe, rock. Sw. dial. klaiv, klev, kliv, as Sc. cleugh, a precipice, rugged ascent, narrow hollow between precipitous banks; OE. clough, a kind of breach down the side of a hill (Verstegan), rima quædam vel fissura ad montis clivum vel declivum.—Somner.

Du. kloof, cleft, ravine, cleft of a hill.

Climate. Lat. clima, climate, region; Gr. κλίμα, -τος (from κλίνω, to bend, sink, verge), an inclination, declivity, slope; a region or tract of country considered with respect to its inclination towards the pole, and hence climate, temperature.

Climax. Gr. κλίμαξ, a ladder, a figure in rhetoric, implying an advance or in-crease in force or interest in each suc-cessive member of a discourse until the highest is attained.

Climb. See Clamber.

To Clinch. See Clench.

-cline. Gr. κλίνω, to slope or make slant, incline, bend; Lat. clino, -atum, to incline, bow. AS. hlinian, OHG. hlinen, to lean. Decline, to bend downwards; recline, to lean backwards, &c.

To Cling. To stick to, to form one mass with, also to form a compact mass, and so to contract, to shrink up, to wither. AS. clingan, to wither. A Sussex peasant speaks of a 'clung bat,' for a dry stick. 'Till famine cling thee.'—Shaks. Pl.D. klingen, klungeln, verklungeln, to shrink up.

We have often observed that in verbs like cling, cleng, where the present has a thin vowel, the participial form is the nearer to the original root. In the present case the origin must be sought in a form like MHG. klunge, klungelin, Swiss klungele, a ball of thread; 'glungelin, globulus' (Gl. in Schmeller); Sw. dial. klunk, a lump; G. klunker, a lump, tuft, clot, whence E. clinker, a lump of half-fused matter which clogs up the bars of a furnace. Da. klynge, a cluster, knot; klynge, to cluster, to crowd together; klynge sig ved, to cling to a thing. E. dial. to clunge, to crowd or squeeze; clungy, sticky.—Hal.

Clink. The noise of a blow that gives a sound of a high note. G., Du. klinken, Sw. klinka, to sound sharp, to ring. See Clang. In imitative words the same idea is frequently expressed by a syllable with an initial cl, and a similar syllable without the l. Thus chink is also used for a shrill sound. So we have clatter and chatter in the same sense; Gael. gliong, and E. gingle; Fr. quincailler, Norman clincailler, a tinman. The E. clink was formerly used like chink in the sense of a crack, because things in cracking utter a sharp sound. Du. klincke, rima, parva ruptura, fissura, Ang. clinke.—Kil.

To Clip. 1. To cut with shears, from the clapping or snapping sound made by the collision of the blades, as to snip in the same sense from snap. G. klippen, to clink; auf- und zuklippen, to open and shut with a snap; klippchen, knippchen, a fillip or rap with the fingers; knippen, schnippen, to snap or fillip; schnippen, to snip. ON., Sw. klippa, to clip, Sw. klippa, also to wink; ON. klippur, E. dial. clips, shears.

2. The collision of two sharp edges leads to the notion not always of complete separation, but sometimes merely of pinching or compression. Thus to nip is either to separate a small portion or merely to pinch. G. knippen, to snap; kneipen, to pinch. In a similar way Swiss kluben, to snap; kluben, klupen, to pinch; klupe, tongs, claw, clutch, pinch, difficulty; G. kluppe, a clip or split piece of wood for pinching the testicles of a sheep or a dog's tail, met. pinch, straits, difficulty. Sw. dial. klipa, to pinch, nip, compress; kläpp, a clog or fetter for a beast; Du. kleppe, klippe, knippe, a snare, fetter.

Clique. Fr. clique, G. klicke, a faction, party, gang. 'Das volk hat sich in splitten, klubben und klicken aufgelöset.' From Pl.D. klak, klik, kliks, a separate portion, especially of something soft or clammy. Een kliks botter, a lump of butter. Bi klik un klak, by bits.

-cliv-. Lat. clivus, a rising ground, hill; declivis, sloping downwards; acclivis, sloping upwards; proclivis, sloping forwards, disposed to a thing.

Cloak. Flem. klocke, toga, pallium, toga muliebris.—Kil. Bohem. klok, a woman's mantle; kukla, a hood. Walach. gluga, a hood, hooded cloak. W. cochl, a mantle. See Cowl.

Clock. Fr. cloche, G. glocke, Du. klocke, a bell. Before the use of clocks it was the custom to make known the hour by striking on a bell, whence the hour of the day was designated as three, four of the bell, as we now say three or four o'clock. It is probable then that clocks were introduced into England from the Low Countries, where this species of mechanism seems to have inherited the name of the bell which previously performed the same office. Sw. klocka, a bell, a clock.

The word clock is a variation of clack, being derived from a representation of the sound made by a blow, at first probably on a wooden board, which is still used for the purpose of calling to service in the Greek church. Serv. klepalo, the board used for the foregoing purpose in the Servian churches, G. brett-glocke, from klepati, to clap or clack, to beat on the board. Esthon. kolkina (with transposition of the vowel, related to clock, as G. kolbe to E. club), to strike, to beat, kolkima, to make a loud noise, kolki-laud, a board on which one beats for the purpose of calling the family to meals. Bohem. hluk, noise, outcry, hluceti, to resound. ON. klaka, clangere. Gael. clag, Ir. clagaim, to make a noise, ring; clag, clog, a bell. Swiss klokken, kloggen, to knock.

* Clod.—Clot. The notion of a loose moveable substance, as thick or curdled liquids, or bagging clothes, is often expressed by forms representing the sounds made in the agitation or dashing of such bodies. Thus from Swab. läppern, to paddle or dabble in the wet, or loppern, to rattle or shake to and fro, we pass to läpperig, watery, lopperig, loose, shaky, and E. loppered (of milk), curdled, wabbling; from Du. lobberen, to flounder in the wet, to lobberig, gelatinous, lobbig, hanging loose and full, E. loblolly, thick spoon meat; from Du. slabberen, slobberen, to sup up liquid food, to flap as loose clothes, or E. slobber, slop, to spill liquids, we pass to E. dial. slab, slob, loose mud, and Du. slobbe, loose trowsers, slops; from Du. slodderen, G. schlottern, to wabble, dangle, hang loose, Bav. schlattern, to rattle, schlettern, to slop or spill liquids, we pass to Schlatter, schlott, mud, dirt, schlotter, thick sour milk, Swiss schlott, geschlotter (as E. slops), wide bagging clothes.

Then as the parts of a loose substance in a state of agitation are thrown in different directions, and thus seem endowed with separate existence, the radical syllable of the word signifying agitation of such a body is applied to a portion or separate part, in the first instance of a liquid or loose substance, but subsequently of a body of any kind.

Thus from Bav. loppern above mentioned may be explained Fr. loppe, lopin, a lump; from Du. lobberen, E. lob, a large lump. The origin of clod and clot is to be found in forms like Du. klateren, to rattle, to dash like heavy rain, kloterspaen, a rattle, kloteren, tuditare, pulsare crebro ictu (Kil.), and thence to clot or curdle as milk. Klottermelck, clotted milk; klotte, a clod. 'I clodde, figer, congeler. I clodder like whey or blode whan it is colde. I clodde, I go into heapes or peces as the yerthe doth, je amoncele.'—Palsgr. Again we have Swiss klotten, klottern, to rattle, kloten, kloden, to dabble, tramp in wet or mire, klot, klod, Du. kladde, a blot, splash, spot of dirt, lump of mud on the clothes; Dan. klat, a spot, blot, clot, lump, dab.

In the same way Dan. pludre, to paddle in the wet, is connected with pludder, mire, Fr. bloutre, and Gael. plod, a clod; Swab. motzen, to dabble, paddle, with Fr. motte, a clod.

To Clog. To hinder by the adhesion of something clammy or heavy. Sc. claggy, unctuous, bespotted with mire; claggock, a dirty wench; E. dial. clag, to stick or adhere; claggy, sticky; dag locks, clotted locks; clegger, to cling; Dan. klag, mud; klæg, clammy loam.

The word is probably formed on an analogous plan to clod or club, from the dashing off of a separate portion of a liquid or sloppy material. G. klack! kleck! represents the sound made by the fall of something soft or liquid (Sanders), whence klack, kleck, Pl.D. klakk, a blot, a portion of something soft and adhesive, a trowelful of mortar, lump of butter, &c.; klakken, beklakken, to bedaub, bespatter. Klak also, like G. kleck or lack, or Sc. lag, is a blot on one's character, an imputation, aspersion.

He was a man without a dag, His heart was frank without a flaw. MHG. mâse noch klac, neither spot nor stain. Manx claggerey, a babbler, indicates the use of clag to represent the dashing of water, the figure from which the idea of tattling is commonly expressed. Russ. klokotat, to bubble, boil.

Then with the loss of the initial c (as in lump, lunch, compared with clump, clunch), Sc. laggery, miry; laggerit, bemired, encumbered; OE. laggyn, or drablyn; laggyd or bedrabelyd, paludosus.—Pr. Pm.

A clog would thus in the first instance be a lump of something soft, then a lump or unformed mass in general. Clog, truncus.—Pr. Pm. A Yule-clog, a Christmas log.

A clog in the sense of a wooden sole may be considered as a block of wood, in accordance with It. zocco, a log, zoccoli, clogs, pattens; G. klotz, a block, log, klotzschuh, a clog or wooden shoe; Mod. Gr. τζόκον, a log, τζόκαρον, a clog. Or the name may be taken from the resemblance of a wooden clog to the lumps of earth which clog the feet of one walking in soft ground, in accordance with Pl.D. klunkern, lumps of butter, fat, dirt, klönken, clogs for the feet; klakk, lump of something soft; Fr. claque, clog or overshoe.

Cloister. G. kloster, Fr. cloître, a monastery. Lat. claustrum, from claudo, clausum, to shut.

Close, -close, -clus-. Lat. claudo, clausum, in comp. -cludo, -clusum, to shut, shut up, terminate, end. It. chiudere, chiuso, Fr. clorre, clos, to shut up, close, inclose, finish; clos, a field inclosed; clos, closed, shut up.

Hence inclose, to shut in; foreclose, from Fr. fors, without, to close against one.

Closhe. The game called ninepins, forbidden by 17 Ed. IV. Du. klos, a ball, bowl; klos-bane, a skittle-ground; klossen, to play at bowls.

Cloth.—Clothe. AS. clath, cloth, cla-

AS. clathas, clothes; G. kleid, ON. klædi, a garment. Properly that which covers and keeps one warm. W. clyd, warm, sheltered; lle clyd, a warm place; dillad clydion, warm clothes (dillad, clothes). Bret. clet, sheltered; Ir. cludaim, to cover up warm, to cherish, nourish; cludadh, a cover or coverture; Gael. clumhar, cluthmhor, warm, sheltered; cluthaich, cluth-eudaich, clothe, make warm.

Cloud. Correctly explained by Somner as clodded vapours, vapours drawn into clods or separate masses.
Vapours which now themselves consort In several parts, and closely do conspire, Clumpered in balls of clouds.—More in R.

ODu. clot, a clod, clote, a cloud; 'eene vurige clote,' a fiery cloud.—Delfortrie. It. zolla, clod, lump of earth; zolla dell' aria, the thick and scattered clouds in the air.—Fl.

So also from Fr. matte, motte, a clod or clot, ciel mattoné, a curdled sky, a sky full of small curdled clouds.—Cot. Clowdys, clods.—Coventry Mysteries in Hal.

Clout. AS. clut, a patch. The primary sense is a blow, as when we speak of a clout on the head. Du. klotsen, to strike. Then applied to a lump of material clapped on or hastily applied to mend a breach. In the same way E. botch, to mend clumsily, from Du. botsen, to strike; E. cobble, in the same sense, from W. cobio, E. cob, to strike.

Clove. 1. A kind of spice resembling little nails. Du. naegel, kruyd-naegel (kruyd = spice); G. nagelein, nelke (dim. of nagel, a nail); It. chiodo di girofano, Fr. clou de girofle, Sp. clavo de especias, from Lat. clavus, a nail.
2. A division of a root of garlick. Du. kluyve, kluyfken loocks; Pl.D. klove, klaven; een klaven kruflook, G. eine spalte knoblauch, a clove of garlick, from Du. klieven, Pl.D. kloven, to cleave or split, Du. klove, a fissure. It. chiodo d' aglio.

Clover. A plant with trifid leaves. AS. clæfer; Du. klæver; Pl.D. klever, from kloven, to cleave.

Clown. The significations of a clod or lump, of thumping clumsy action, and of a rustic unpolished person, are often connected. Du. kloete, a ball, a lump, block, stock, also homo obtusus, hebes (Kil.), whence the name of Spenser's shepherd Colin Clout. G. klotz, a log, klotzig, blockish, loggish, coarse, unpolished, rustic.—Küttner. E. clod is used in both senses; of a lump of earth and an awkward rustic. Du. klonte, a clot or clod; kloen, a ball of twine; Dan. klunds, E. dial. clunch, N.Fris. klönne, a clown, bumkin.

As the initial c is easily lost from many of these words beginning with cl (compare clog, log, clump, lump, clunch, lunch), it can hardly be doubted that clown is identical with lown, and clout with lout.
This loutish clown is such that you never saw so ill-favored a vizor.—Sidney in R.

To Cloy. From clog, a thick mass. Fr. encloyer (to stop with a clog or plug), to cloy, choke or stop up.—Cot. A piece of ordnance is said to be cloyed, when something has got into the touch-hole.

The same consonantal change is seen in clag, claggy, sticky, and clay, a sticky, clammy earth.

The sense of stopping up is frequently expressed by the word for a lump or bunch, as Fr. boucher, to stop, from OFr. bousche, a bunch, tuft. Sw. klump, a lump, and tapp, a bunch, wisp, are also used in the sense of a stopper.

Club.—Clump. ON. klubba, klumba, a club or knobbed stick. Sw. dial. klubb, a lump, knob, clump; klump, a lump, clod, clot; klumpfot, a clubfoot; klabb, a log. W. clob, clobyn, a boss, knob, lump; Pol. kląb, a ball, lump, mass, kłębek, a bobbin, ball of thread; Russ. kluv, a ball, clue.

The radical sense seems to be an unformed lump or thick mass, and the word to be of analogous formation with clod, clot, clog, signifying in the first instance a separate portion thrown off in the dashing of sloppy materials. Fr. dabosser, to bedash (Cot.), esclaboter (Roquef.), éclabousser, to splash, cliboter, to tramp in the mud (Pat. de Champ.), Rouchi clapoter, to slop. Gael. clabaire, a blabber, indicates the application of the root clab to the splashing of water, the terms expressive of tattling being mostly taken from that figure. Clabar, mire, puddle, dirt.

Du. klobbersaen, clotted milk or cream, milk run to lumps. So Fr. caillebottes, lumps of curd, probably from claboter, but confounded with cailler, to curdle.

G. klubbe, kluppe, a bunch, clump, cluster, group of people; Sw. dial. klubb, a knot of people. 'Das volk hat sich in Splittern, klubben und klicken aufgelöset.'—Sanders. A social club was originally a group of people meeting at set times for society. To club one's contributions is to throw them into a common mass.

To Cluck. Imitative of the note of a hen calling her chickens. Du. klocken, Fr. glousser, Lat. glocire, Sp. cloquear, It. coccolare.
-clude, -clus-. Lat. claudo, clausum, in comp. -cludo, -clusum, to shut, close, finish.
Hence conclude, conclusion, exclude, include, inclusive, reclusion, &c. See -close.
* Clump.—To Clumper. Clump, a lump or compact mass, a nasalised form of club, as clumper, to collect in lumps, to curdle, of Du. klobber in klobbersaen, clotted cream.
Vapours—clumpered in balls of clouds.—More.
In the same way Du. klonte, a clod or lump, and klonteren, to curdle, are the nasalised forms of klotte, a clod or clot, and klotteren, to curdle. The notion of a detached mass may arise either from the dashing off of a portion of the wet material, or from the shaking into protuberances of the liquid surface; and the idea of multifarious agitation may be expressed, not so much by direct imita-tion of the actual noise, as metaphorically by the figure of a broken sound. MHG. klumpern, G. klimpern, to gingle, strum on an instrument. When a frequentative form is thus used to signify multifarious agitation or broken movement the radical syllable naturally expresses a single ele-ment of the complex action. Hence a frequent connection between words sig-nifying a blow and the dashing of liquids. Compare Pl.D. pladdern, to paddle or dabble, with E. plad or plod, to tread heavily. Fr. clabosser, esclaboter, to splash; Champ. cliboter, to tramp. Fr. clopin-clopan represents the heavy tread of one hobbling along; cloper, clopiner, to limp, differing only in the absence of the nasal form E. clump, to tramp. Hence klumpers, Du. klompen, wooden shoes, clogs. Sw. dial. klamp, a clog for an animal, wooden sole, lump of soft mate-rial, ball of snow on horse's foot; klampa, to clump or tramp with heavy shoes, to ball as snow. Analogous forms with a final nt instead of mp are Pl.D. klunt, Du. klonte, a clod or lump, E. dial. clunt-er, a clod; clunter, clointer, Pl.D. klunt-sen, klunsen, to tramp or tread heavily.
* Clumsy. The sense of ' awkward, unhandy,' might be reached from clump, a lump, through the senses of lumpish, blockish, unfashioned, ill-made; as from Da. klont, klods, a block, log, klontet, klodset, unhandy, awkward, or from Sw. klump, a lump, klumpig, clumsy. N.E. clumphish, awkward, unwieldy; E.E. clunchy, thick and clumsy.—Hal. But the word is more probably connected with OE. clumse, benumbed with cold.—Cot. in v. havi. Clumsyd, eviratus.—Cath. Ang. ' Thou clomsest for cold.'—P.P. ' Comfort ye clumsid, ether comelid hondis, and make ye strong feeble knees.'—Wycliff, Isaiah. Lincolns. clumphs, idle, lazy, unhandy.—Ray. Sw. dial. klumm-sen, klummshandt, klummerhändt, Che-shire, clussomed (Wilbraham), having the hands stiff with cold. Pl.D. klamen, klomen, Du. verklomen, verkommelen, Fris. klomje, forklomme (Outzen), to be-numb with cold. OE. acomelyd for could or aclommyde, eviratus, enervatus.—Pr. Pm. ' Men bethe combered and clommed with cold.'—Vegecius in Way. Beklum-men van kelde, algidus, gelidus.—Teu-tonista.
The signification would seem to be cramped or contracted with cold, from ON. klemma, G. klemmen, to pinch, to squeeze. OHG. kichlemmit, obstructum.—Graff in Klamjan. MHG. 'wen uns diu wangen sîn gerumpfen, rücke und arm und bein geklumpfen.'—Benecke. Pl.D. beklummen, G. beklommen, pinched, tight; eene beklummene tied, a pinching time.
-clus-. See -clude.
Cluster. A group, bunch. From the notion of sticking together. Du. klos, a ball; klisse, klette, a ball, a clot; klissen, to stick together; klister. Klister, paste, viscous material, also a cluster, a clove of garlick. Sw. klase, a bunch, cluster.
Clutch. Sc. cleik, clek, E. dial. cleche, to snatch, seize, properly to do anything with a quick, smart motion, producing a noise such as that represented by the syllable click. Hence cleik, clek, cleuk, cluik, cluke, clook, an instrument for snatching, a claw, clutch, hand; to cleuk, to grip, lay hold of, clutch. ' Uorte (for to) huden hire vrom his kene clokes.'—Ancr. Riwle, 130. Boh. klikaty, crooked inwards; klikonosy, hooknosed. Hesse, klotz, claw. Compare Swiss klupe, claws, tongs, fingers (familiar), from klupen, to clip or pinch.
Clutter. Variation of clatter, a noise.
Clyster. Fr. clystere, Gr. κλυστήρ, from κλύζω, to wash, to rinse, as Fr. lave-ment, from laver, to wash.
Coach. The Fr. coucher became in Du. koetsen, to lie, whence koetse, koet-seken, a couch, and koetse, koetsie, koets-wagen, a litter, carriage in which you may recline, a coach.
Coal. ON. kol, G. kohle, Hindust.

koela. The primary sense is doubtless glowing embers, from a root signifying to glow or burn. Traces of such a derivation are found in Sw. dial. kylla, kôlla, kolna, to kindle or cause to burn; ON. koljarn, a firesteel; Lat. caleo, to be hot, to glow; culina or colina, a kitchen, the place where a fire is made. 'Colina' says Varro, 'dicta ab eo quod ibi colebant ignem.' And colo, to worship, may perhaps have originally signified to kindle a fire for a burnt-offering, while the sense of dwelling may be a figure from lighting up the domestic hearth, universally taken as the symbol of a dwelling-place. Sanscr. jval, to burn, blaze, glow; jvalaya, to kindle; jvâla, flame. Lett. quêlêt, to glow, to be inflamed; quêle, burning, inflammation.

Coalesce.—Coalition. Lat. coalesco, to grow together, to form an union with another; coalitus, grown together, united.

Coarse. Formerly written course, ordinary; as in the expression of course, according to the ordinary run of events. A woman is said to be very ordinary, meaning that she is plain and coarse.

Coast. Lat. costa, a rib, side; Fr. coste, s. s., also a coast.

Coat. Fr. cotte, a coat or frock, It. cotta, any kind of coat, frock, or upper garment. See Cot. 3.

Coax. The OE. cokes was a simpleton, gull, probably from the Fr. cocasse, one who says or does laughable or ridiculous things.—Trevoux. Cocasse, plaisant, ridicule; cocosse, niais, imbecille.—Hécart. To cokes or coax one then is to make a cokes or fool of him, to wheedle or gull him into doing something.

The original meaning of the word is preserved in the provincial kakasch (dialect of Aix—Grandg. v. cacâ), a nest-cock or nescock, unfledged bird, a creature commonly taken as the type of imbecility and liability to imposition, as in E. gull, Fr. niais, béjaune. Nescock itself is used in a similar sense; 'a wanton fondling that has never left his home.'—Nares. It. cucco (in nursery lang.), an egg, a darling, and fig. an imbecile; vecchio cucco, an old idiot.

* Cob.—Cobble. w. cob, a knock, thump, a tuft, top; cobio, to knock, thump, to peck as a hen; cobyn, a bunch, tuft, cluster, E. dial. to cob, to strike, to throw; cob, a blow, and thence a lump; cobnut, a large round nut; cobstones, large stones; cobcoals, large coals. A cob is a dumpy horse. Cob for walls is clay mixed with straw, from being laid on in lumps.

Cobber, a thumper, a great falsehood.

Cobbles in the N. of E. are round stones or round coals of small size. In the E. of E. the stone or kernel of fruit is called cob or cobble. Cobylstone or chery-stone, petrilla.—Pr. Pm. To cobble, to pelt with stones or dirt.—Cleveland Gl.

* To Cobble.—Cobbler. The senses of stammering or imperfect speech, staggering or halting, and imperfect or unskilful action, are often connected. We may cite Fr. bredouiller, to stutter, and Du. broddelen, to bungle; Du. hakkelen, to stammer, and E. dial. haggle, to bungle; Sc. habble, to stutter, to speak or act confusedly, and hobble, to cobble shoes.—'all graith that gains to hobill schone.' Thus from E. dial. cobble, to hobble (Hal.), or walk clumsily, the designation may have been transferred to the unskilful mending of shoes. A plausible origin, however, may be found in Sw. dial. klabba, properly to daub, then to work unskilfully; klabbare, klabbsmed, a bungler. The l in these imitative forms is very moveable, as shown in clob and cob, tempered clay for building, and a change very similar to that from clobber to cobler may be seen in Du. verklomen, verkommelen, to benumb, OE. acomelyd or aclommyd.—Pr. Pm.

Cobweb. A spider's web. E. atter-kop, a spider. Flem. kop, koppe, a spider, koppen-gespin, spinne-webbe, a cobweb, w. pryf-coppyn, a spider (pryf=grub, vermin). The form attercop seems to give the full meaning of the word, poison-bag or poison-pock. The Fris. kop is bubble, pustule, pock, that is, a pellicle inflated with air or liquid. T' waerkopet, the water boils.—Outzen. Dan. kopper (pl.), small pox (pocks); kop-ar, E. pock-arr, a pock mark. Fin. kuppa, a bubble, boil, pustule. According to Ihre, the bee was known by the name of kopp in OSw., probably for the same reason as the spider, viz. from bearing a bag, only of honey instead of poison. The contrast between the bee and the spider as collectors, the one of sweets and the other of poisons, is one of long standing.

Cochineal. Sp. cochinilla, a wood-louse, dim. of cochina, a sow, from some fancied resemblance. The wood-louse is still called sow in parts of England; in Essex sowbug.—Atkinson. When the Spaniards came to America they transferred the name to the animal producing the scarlet dye, which somewhat resembles a wood-louse in shape.

Cock. I. The male of the domestic fowl. From the cry represented by the Fr. coquelicoq, coquericot, Lang. cou-couricou. Bohem. kokrati, to crow, kokot, a cock. Serv. kokot, the clucking of a hen, kokosch, a hen. Lith. kukti, to cry, to howl; kukauti, to cry as the cuckoo or the owl. Magy. kakas, Esth. kuk, a cock. Gr. Κοκκοβόας ὄρνις (Soph. in Eustath.), the bird which cries cock!, the cock.

To Cock, applied to the eye, hat, tail, &c., signifies to stick abruptly up. Gael. coc-shron, a cocked nose. The origin is the sound of a quick sudden motion imitated by the syllable cock. It. coccare, to clack, snap, click, crack; coccarla a qualcuno, to play a trick, put a jest upon one.—Fl. Hence cock of a gun (misunderstood when translated by G. hahn), the part which snaps or clicks.

To cock is then to start up with a sudden action, to cause suddenly to project, to stick up. And as rapid snapping action is almost necessarily of a reciprocating nature, the word is used to express zigzag movement or shape, and hence either prominent teeth or indentations. The cock of a balance is the needle which vibrates to and fro between the cheeks. The cog of a wheel is a projecting tooth, while the It. cocca, Fr. coche, is the notch or indentation of an arrow.

2. A cock of hay. Probably from the notion of cocking or sticking up. Fin. kokko, a coniform heap, a hut, beacon. A small heap of reaped corn. Dan. kok, a heap, a pile.

3. A boat; cock-swain, the foreman of a boat's crew. It. cocca, cucca, a cock-boat.—Fl. Dan. kog, kogge, ON. kuggi, Sw. s. The Fin. has kokka, the prow of a vessel, perhaps the part which cocks or sticks up, and hence the name may have passed to the entire vessel, as in the case of Lat. puppis, properly the poop or after-part of the ship, or of bark, a ship, from ON. barki, throat, then the prow or front of a ship.

Cockade. Fr. coquarde, a Spanish cap, also any cap worn proudly or pertly on the one side (Cot.), i. e. a cocked-hat, consisting originally of a hat with the broad flap looped up on one side. Then applied to the knot of ribbon with which the loop was ornamented. In Walloon the n is lost as in English; cockâd, a cockade.—Rémacle.

Cockahoop. Elated in spirits. A metaphor taken from the sport of cock-throwing used on festive occasions, when a cock was set on an eminence to be thrown at by the guests.

Now I am a frisker, all men on me look, What should I do but set cock on the hoop?
Camden in Todd.

'I have good cause to set the cocke on the hoop and make gaudye chere.' 'We may make our tryumphe, i. e. kepe our gaudyes, or let us sette the cocke on the hoop and make good chere within doores.'—Palsgr. Acolastus in Hal. Du. hoop, heap.

Cockatoo. According to Crawfurd called in Malay kakatuwa, which in that language signifies a vise, a gripe. But is it not more likely that the implement was so named from its resemblance to the powerful beak of the bird?

Cockatrice. A fabulous animal, supposed to be hatched by a cock from the eggs of a viper, represented heraldically by a cock with a dragon's tail. Sp. cocatriz, cocadriz, cocodrilo, a crocodile. Cocatryse, basiliscus, cocodrillus.—Pr. Pm. A manifest corruption of the name of the crocodile.

To Cocker. See Cockney.

Cocket.
Cocksy. Fr. coquart, foolishly proud, cocket, malapert. From the strutting pride of a cock. Coqueter, to chuck as a cock among hens; to swagger or strout it as a cock on his own dunghill.—Cot.

Cockle. I. A weed among corn. Fr. coquiole, Lith. kukalas, Pol. kąkol, kąkol-nica, Gael. cogal.

2. A shell, shell-fish; cocklesnail, a snail with a shell as distinguished from a slug or snail without shell. Snail-shells are called in Northamptonsh. cocks, in Lincolnsh. gogs, Oxfordsh. guggles or guggleshells, Hertsh. conks, and E. of Eng. conkers. Tirol. gagkele, an egg.—Deutsch. Mund. 5. 341. Lat. cochlea, concha, Gr. Κοχλος, snail, snailshell, shellfish.

The original sense is probably an egg-shell, which to a people in possession of poultry would offer a type of a shell peculiarly easy of designation. Thus the Swab. gacken, to cluck as a hen, gives rise in nursery language to gackele, an egg—Schmidt, in Swiss gaggi, gaggeli, to which our own country affords a parallel in the Craven goggy, an egg. In like manner Basque kokoratz, clucking of a hen; koko (in nursery language), an egg; Magy. kukoritni, to crow, kuko (nursery), an egg; It. coccolare, to cluck; cocco, cucco (nursery), an egg; Fr. coqueter, to cackle, to chuck ; coque, an eggshell, shell, cockle, with the dim. coquille, the shell of an egg, nut, snail, fish.—Cot.
To Cockle. Properly, like coggle, goggle, joggle, shoggle, to shake or jerk up and down, then applied to a surface thrown into hollows and projections by partial shaking, by unequal contraction, &c. Du. kokelen, to juggle, to deceive the eye by rapid movements of the hands. E. dial, coggle, to be shaky ; cocklety, unsteady.—Hal. A cockling sea is one jerked up into short waves by contrary currents.
It made such a short cockling sea, as if it had been in a race where two tides meet, for it ran every way—and the ship was tossed about like an eggshell, so that I never felt such uncertain jerks in my life.—Dampier in R.
The ultimate origin, as in all these cases, is the representation of a broken sound, by forms like cackle, gaggle, &c., then applied to signify a broken movement, and finally a configuration of analogous character.
As in E. we represent a broken sound by the forms cackle and crackle, so in Fr. we find recoquiller and recroquiller, to wriggle, writhe, turn inward on itself like a worm or a gold or silver thread when it is broken ; recoquiller un livre, to rumple or turn up the leaves of a book.—Cot. If recoquiller stood by itself the common explanation from coquille, a shell, as if it signified to throw into spirals, would be quite satisfactory, but it cannot be adopted without throwing over the analogy with the English forms above mentioned, while it leaves the parallel form recroquiller unaccounted for.
Cockney.—Cocker. The original meaning of cockney is a child too tenderly or delicately nurtured, one kept in the house and not hardened by out-of-doors life ; hence applied to citizens, as opposed to the hardier inhabitants of the country, and in modern times confined to the citizens of London. 'Coknay, carifotus, delicius, mammotrophus.' 'To bring up like a cocknaye—mignoter.' 'Delicias facere—to play the cockney.' 'Dodeliner—to bring up wantonly as a cockney'—Pr. Pm., and authorities cited in notes. 'Puer in deliciis matris nutritus, Anglice a cokenay.'—Hal. Cockney, niais, mignot.—Sherwood.
The Du. kokelen, keukelen, to pamper (the equivalent of E. cocker), is explained by Kilian, 'nutrire sive fovere culina,' as if from koken, to cook, but this is doubtless an accidental resemblance.

The Fr. coqueliner, to dandle, cocker, fedle, pamper, make a wanton of a child, leads us in the right direction. This word is precisely of the same form and significance with dodeliner, to dandle, loll, lull, fedle, cocker, hug fondly, make a wanton of, [but primarily] to rock or jog up and down ; dodelineur, the rocker of a cradle ; dondeliner de la tête, to wag the head ; dodelineux (the same as coquelineux), fantastical, giddy-headed. The primitive meaning of cocker then is simply to rock the cradle, and hence to cherish an infant. See Cockle, Cock.
Cocoa-nut. Called coco by the Portuguese in India on account of the monkey-like face at the base of the nut, from coco, a bugbear, an ugly mask to frighten children.—De Barros, Asia, Dec. III. Bk. III. c. vii.
-coct. Lat. coquo, coctum, to prepare by fire, to cook, bake, boil. Hence concoquo, to boil together, to digest, and fig. to contrive, to plan, E. to concoct. Decoctio, a decoction, what is boiled away from anything.
Cod. A husk or shell, cushion. ON. koddi, a cushion, Sw. kudde, a sack, bag, pod. Bret. kôd, gôd, gôdel, a pocket, w. côd, cwd, a bag or pouch. G. schote, pod, husk. It seems the same word with Fr. cosse, gousse, a husk, cod, or pod, whence coussin. It. coscino, a cushion, a case stuffed with something to make it bulge out. Perhaps the original sense is simply something bulging, a knob or bump, an idea commonly derived from a word signifying to knock. Now we have Fr. cosser. It. cozzare, to butt as a ram. Du. kodde, kodse, a club.
As in words with an initial cl the l is very movable, we may perhaps identify the Fr. cosse, a husk, with Bret. klos, klosen, a box or any envelope in general; klosen-gisten, the husk of a chestnut. Thus we are brought round to the Du. kloss, a ball or sphere, and the E. clot, clod, and as the latter appears in Gaelic in the double form of clod or plod, we find the same change of initial in the E. cod, pod; Dan. pude, a pillow.
To Coddle. 1.—Codling. To coddle, (in Suffolk quoddle,) to boil gently, whence codlin, a young apple fit for boiling, green peas.—Hal. Codlyng, fruite, pomme cuite.—Palsgr. A quodling, pomum coctile.—Coles. The word in the first instance represents the agitation of the boiling water. ON. quoila, abluo vel lavito, aquas tractito (Gudm.); to dabble or paddle; Swab. quatteln, to wabble; Bav. kudern, to guggle.
To Coddle, 2. To pamper or treat delicately. Fr. cadel, a castling, starve-ling, whence cadeler (to treat as a weakly child), to cocker, pamper, fèdle, make much of.—Cot. Lat. catulus, It. catello, Prov. cadel, Bohem. kote, a whelp; kotiti, to whelp, bring forth young (of sheep, dogs, cats, &c.).

Code.—Codicil. Lat. codex, log, trunk of a tree, a book, book of accounts, the Romans writing on wooden tablets covered with wax. Codicillus, a small trunk of a tree; codicilli, writing tablets, a letter, memorial, written composition.

Cod-fish. From its large club-shaped head. Flem. kodde, a club.—Kil. In the same way It. mazzo, a bunch, a codfish, mazza, a club. One of the names of the fish is It. testuto, Fr. testu, from teste, head.—Cot.

Codger. A term of abuse for an in-firm old man. G. kotzen, to spit, kotzer, a spitting or spawling man or woman, also an old caugher.—Küittner. So from Lith. kraukti, to croak, to breathe with pain, sukraukelis, a croaker, an old man. Hind. kahba, a cough, an old woman.

Coemetery. Gr. Κοιμητήριον, a place for sleeping in, then applied to the place of final rest, a burial-place, from κοιμάω, to set to sleep.

Coerce. Lat. coerceo, to encompass, keep in, restrain; arceo, to inclose, con-fine; arctus, close, narrow, confined.

Coeval. Lat. coævus (con and ævum, duration of time, an age, era), of the same age or era.

Coffee. Arab. cahwa, or cahwi, coffee, formerly one of the names for wine. Texeira, who wrote in 1610, writes it kaodh.—Dozy.

Coffer.—Coffin. Gr. κόφινος, Lat. coph-inus, a basket. It. cofano, cofaro, any coffin, coffer, chest, hutch, or trunk. Fr. coffre, a chest or coffer, the bulk or chest of the body. Bret. kôf, kôv, the belly; AS. cof, a cave, cove, receptacle. Swab. kober, a basket. It. coffia, a gabion or wicker basket. Fr. cofin, a coffin, a great candle case or any such close and great basket of wicker.—Cot. Fin. kopp, a hollow case. See Cave.

Cog.—Coggle. To coggle is to be shaky, to rock; cogly, unsteady, rock-ing; cockersome, unsteady in position, threatening to tumble over.—Jam. E. dial. coggle, keggle, kickle, tickle, easily moved.—Wilbraham. Joggly, unsteady, shaky; to jogger, joggle, to shake, to jog.
A continued broken sound is represented by forms like cackle, gaggle, and thence cockle, goggle are made to signify inter-rupted or alternating movement. Esthon. kokkoltama, koggalema, to stammer. The radical syllable cock, cog, gog, &c., is itself used to signify the same kind of action, or a single element of the kind of which the action in question is com-posed, that is to say, a short, abrupt move-ment (often accompanied by a click or snap), and hence a projection or indenta-tion. We may cite Gael. gogach, nod-ding, wavering, reeling; E. gogmire, a quagmire; to jock, to jolt; jocky, uneven, rough; Fr. choc, a shock, or movement brought to a sudden stop; It. coccare, to snap, to move with a snap, and thence cocca, an indentation or notch, as E. cog (Sw. kugge), a projection or individual prominence on the circumference of a toothed wheel.
With the addition of an initial s, E. shog, to jolt, and shoggle, an icicle or pro-jection of ice; ON. skaga, to project; skagi, a promontory.
To cog in the sense of cheating is from the image of deceiving by rapid sleight of hand. Du. kokelen, to juggle; It. coccarta ad uno, to put a trick upon one; coccare, to laugh at, mock, scoff. Sp. cocar, to mock, make mocking or ridicul-ous gestures, to cajole, wheedle, E. cog, gabber, flatter—Sherwood; lusingare, lis-ciar il pelo.—Torriano.

Cogent. Lat. cogo (pcpl. cogens), to impel, constrain, force.

Cogitation. Lat. cogito, to ponder, turn over in the mind.

Cognisance.—Recognisance.—Re-connoitre. From Lat. cognosco, cog-nitum, to know, arose Fr. cognoitre, connaitre, to know, OFr. cognoisance, cognisance, connusance, knowledge, no-tice, a badge or heraldic device by which one might be known.
Connaissance in a legal sense is the right of a tribunal to take notice or cog-nisance of certain causes.
Again OFr. recognoitre, to take know-ledge of, to acknowledge, gives our legal recognisance, or acknowledgment that one is bound in a certain penalty to the crown if he fails to perform a certain act.
Reconnaitre, in the military sense, to re-connoitre, is to take knowledge of the conditions of an object, to observe it with reference to the way in which it affects the observer.

Coif. A cap for the head. Fr. coiffe. It. cuffia, Mod.Gr. σκόφια. Apparently from the East. Arab. kufiyah, a head kerchief.

Coil. To coil a cable, to wind it round in the form of a ring, each fold of rope being called a coil. Fr. cueillir un cord-age, Ptg. colher hum cabo, to coil a cable; colher, Fr. cueillir, Sp. coger, Lat. colli-gere, to gather. Sp. coger la ropa, to fold linen.

Coil. Noise, disturbance. Gael. coil-eid, a stir, movement, or noise; perhaps from goil, boiling, vapour, fume, battle, rage, fury; goileam, prating, vain tattle. The words signifying noise and disturb-ance are commonly taken from the agita-tion of water.

Coin. To coin money is to stamp money, from Lat. cuneus, Fr. coin, quin, the steel die with which money is stamped, originally doubtless from the stamping having been effected by means of a wedge (Lat. cuneus, Fr. coin). Coin in OFr. was frequently used for the right of coining money. Sp. cuña, a wedge; cuño, a die for coining, impression on the coin. Muratori endeavours to show that the word is really derived from the Gr. εἰκών, an image, whence the Lat. iconiare, in the sense of coining money. So from w. bath, a likeness, arian bath, coined money, bathu, to make a likeness, to coin.

Coit.—Quoit. To coit, to toss, to throw. Of a conceited girl it is said, She coits up her head above her betters.—Forby. To coit a stone.—Hal. The game of coits or quoits consists in tossing a metal disc (originally doubtless a stone) at a mark. The quoit according to Hal. is sometimes called a coiting stone. Coyte, petriluda; coytyn, petriludo.—Pr. Pm. Du. de kaeye schieten, certare disco, saxco, ferreo, aut plumbeo.—Kil.

Coke. The carbonaceous cinder of coals left when the bituminous or gaseous blazing portion has been driven off by heat. Coaks, cinders; a grindle-coke, a remnant of an old worn-down grindstone. Colke, the core of an apple.
All erthe may well likened be To a rounde appul on a tre, That even amydde hath a colke: And so it may to an egges yolke, For as a dalk (hollow) is amydward The yolke of the egge when hit is hard, So is helle put (pit) as clerkus telles Amidde the erthe and nowher elles.—Hal. v. dalk.
Wall. chauke, germe de l'oeuf,—Grandg. Clevel. golk, yolk of egg, core of an apple or an ulcer. The coke is the hole guarded by metal in the middle of a sheave through which the pin goes.—Webster. Du. kolk, a pit, hollow whirl-pool. The term colk or coke then appears to signify a hollow, then the empty rem-nant of a thing when the virtue is taken out of it. It may possibly be explained from the Gael. caoch, empty, blind, hol-low; caochag, a deaf nut, nut without a kernel, the coke of a nut.

Col-. See Con-.

Colander.—Cullender. Sp. colada, lie of ashes for bucking clothes; coladero, a colander or sieve through which the lie was strained, a strainer; colar, Lat. colo, to strain liquids.

Cold.—Cool. Goth. kalds, cold. ON. kala, to blow cold, to suffer from cold; kallda, fever. Dan. kule (of the wind), to freshen, to begin to blow. G. kalt, cold, kühl, cool. Lap. kalot, to freeze, kålom, cold, frost.
In Lith. szalias, cold, sziltas, warm, the opposite sensations are distinguished by a modification of the vowel, while in Lat. gelidus, cold, calidus, hot, a similar relation in meaning is marked by a modi-fication of the initial consonant.
The original image seems the disagree-able effect produced on the nerves by a harsh sound, whence the expression is extended to a similar effect on the other organs. Fin. kolia, sounding harshly as a rattle, rough, uneven, cold; kolia ilma, a cold air; kolian-lainen, roughish, cool; kolistua, to become cold as the air, or rough as a road; kolistus, making a crash, shattering. Esthon. kollisema, to rattle, make a harsh noise; kollin, a rack-et; kolle, noisy, frightful, ghastly; kollo-mats, a bugbear. The effects of fear and cold closely resemble each other in de-pressing the spirits and producing trem-bling. The Manuel des Pecchés says of Belshazzar when he saw the handwriting on the wall: As he thys hande began to holde (behold) Hys herte bygan to tremle and colde.
Fin. kolkka, sounding loud as a bell, then causing trembling or terror, ghastly; —ilma, a cold, raw day; —mies, a harsh, severe man; —korpi, a desolate wood. Compare ON. kald-lyndr, harsh, severe in disposition; kallda-gatnan, bitter sport; kald-ambr, distressing labour.

Collar. Lat. collare (from collum, the neck), a band for the neck.

Collation. An entertainment. Fr. collation, a repast after supper. It. colatione, colettione, coletto, an intermeal, a refection between regular meals; break-fast.
Colleague.—College. Lat. collega, supposed to be from lego, to choose, one chosen at the same time with one, a com-rade. The radical part of the word however would be more satisfactorily explained if it could be regarded as the equivalent of the ON. lag, society, companionship, whence sam-lag, companionship, part-nership; felagi, a money companion or partner, a fellow; brod-lagi, fisk-lagi, a partner at meals, in fishing, &c. Colle-gium, a college, society, corporation, guild, the relationship of one colleague to another.
To Collect.—Collect. Lat. lego, lec-tum, to pick, to gather; colligo, -ectum, to bring together, to collect, assemble. Collect, a prayer gathered out of Scripture.
Collision. Lat. collisio (collido, -isum, to dash or strike together), the act of striking together.
Collop. A lump or slice of meat. From clop or colp, representing the sound of a lump of something soft thrown on a flat surface. Du. klop, It. colpo, a blow. Colp, a blow, also a bit of anything.—Bailey. The two significations are very commonly expressed by the same term. Sp. golpe, a blow, also a flap, as the loose piece of cloth covering a pocket. In like manner we have dab, a blow, and a lump of something soft; a pat with the hand, and a pat of butter; G. klitsch, a clap, rap, tap, and a lump of something soft; Sc. to blad, to slap, to strike, and blad, bland, a lump or slice; to dad, to dash, to throw down, and dad, dawd, a lunch or large piece, especially of something eatable. See Calf.
Collow.—Colly. Smut, soot. To colowe, make black with a cole, char-bonner.—Palsgr. in Way. Colled, be-colled, smutted, blackened.—K. Horn. N. kola, to black or smut with coal; kolut, smutted.—Aasen. Sw. dial. kolna, to become black.
Colly. A shepherd's dog, from having its tail cropped. Sw. kullug, kollig, with-out horns, wanting some member that ought to be there.—Rietz. Sc. to coll, to poll the hair, to snuff the candle. In Hesse a shepherd's dog is often called Mutz, from mutz, a stump; kullmutz, kullarsch, a tailless hen. See Poll.
Colon.—Comma. Colon (Gr. κωλον, a limb or member) and comma (Gr. κομμα, a piece or chop, from κοπτω, I cut) were applied respectively to the principal members of a sentence, and the briefest divisions of which it was composed. Jerome, in his preface to the Prophets, says, ' Nemo cum prophetas versibus viderit esse descriptos metro eos existimet apud Hebræos ligari—; sed quod in Demosthene et in Tullio solet fieri, ut per cola scribantur et commata.'—N. & Q. Dec. 19, 1868. The name is now given not to the divisions of the sentence, but to the marks by which divisions of the kind in question are separated in writing.
* Colonel. Fr. colonel, Sp. coronel. Properly the captain of the leading com-pany of a regiment, the company at the head of the column. 'La compagnie colonelle, ou la colonelle est la première compagnie d'un regiment d'infanterie.'—Trevoux.
Colossal. Lat. colossus, a statue of enormous magnitude. Such was the statue in honour of the sun erected at Rhodes.
Colour. Lat. color, a hue, tint, ap-pearance.
Colt. A young horse. Dan. dial. klod, kloit, a colt. Sw. kult, a young boar, a stout boy.
Column.—Colonnade. Lat. columna, Fr. colonne, a pillar.
Comatose. Gr. κωμα, heavy slumber, oppressive drowsiness.
Com-. See Con-.
Comb. ON. kambr, G. kamm.
Combe. A narrow valley. W. cwm.
* Comber.—Cumber. G. kummer, arrest, seizure, attachment of one's goods or person, rubbish, ruins, dirt of streets, trouble, distress; Du. kommer, komber, trouble, distress. Mid.Lat. combri, ob-struction of the ways made by felling trees in a forest; combri, combra, a weir or dam for obstructing the current of a river.—Duc. Fr. encombrer. It. ingom-brare, to hinder, trouble, encumber; des-combres, what has to be cleared away, rubbish, ruins. The radical sense is im-pediment, hindrance. I comber, I let or hynder.—Palsgr. Gael. cumraig, cum-raich, impede, incommode. Manx cumr, cumree, to hinder, deter, delay; cumrail, hindrance, stoppage. The question is whether the sense of rubbish is derived from rubbish being considered as a hin-drance or whether the development of thought does not lie in the opposite direc-tion. It is derived by Diez from Lat. cumulus, Prov. comol, a heap, Ptg. comero, combro, a mound, heap of earth, corre-sponding to which we have ON. kumbl, kumb, a cairn, tumulus, barrow, Sw. kummel, a heap of stones set up for a mark, ruins, rubbish. Again, a parallel form with cumber may be found in ON. kumla, to disable. 'Var Aron sárr ok kumladr mjök,' Aaron was wounded and much disabled. Hialmr kumladr, a battered helmet. E. cumbled with cold, cramped, stiffened ; comelyd, acomelyd, acomyrd, acombrd, for colde, eviratus, enervatus.—Pr. Pm. Cambered and clommed with colde.—MS. cited by Way. Du. verkommelen, to be stiff with cold. See Clumsy.
Combine. Lat. bini, two together ; 'combino, to join together or unite.
Combustion.—Combustible. Lat. uro, ustum, to burn ; comburo (con-uro), to burn up.
To Come.—Comely. Goth. cwiman, AS. cwiman, cuman, G. kommen, Du. komen, to come. The Biglotton also explains the Du. komen, cadere, convenire, decere, quadrare. Dat comt wel, bene cadit, convenit, decet, quadrat. In the same way to fall was used in OE. It nothing falls to thee To make fair semblant where thou mayest blame.
Chaucer, R. R.
G. gefallen, to fall to a person's mind, to please. In this sense the verb come must be understood in the E. comely and the Du. komelick, conveniens, congruens, commodus, aptus.—Kil. See Become.
This application is marked by a slight modification of form in the AS. cweman, becweman, to please, delight, satisfy, G. bequem, convenient, commodious, easy.
Comedy.—Comic. Gr. κωμῳδία, a dramatic poem intended to take off or caricature personal or popular peculiarities ; κωμικός, relating to comedy.
Comfit. Fr. confire, confit (Lat. conficere, confectum, to prepare), to preserve, confect, soak or steep in ; confitures, comfits, junkets, all kind of sweetmeats.—Cot.
Comfort. Fr. comforter (Lat. fortis, strong), to solace, encourage, strengthen.—Cot.
Comfrey. A plant formerly in repute as a strengthener, whence it was called knitback (Cot. in v. oreille d'âne), and in Lat. consolida, confirma, or conserva.—Dief. Sup. E. comfrey seems a corruption of the second of these.
Comma.—See Colon.
Commence. It. cominciare, Fr. commencer. From con and initiare, Milanese inza, to begin. OSp. compenzar, com-pesar. Sardin. incumenzai, from incom-initiare ; Sp. empezar, from in-initiare.—Diez. Menage.
Comment. Lat. comminiscor, -mentus sum, commentor, to imagine, devise, to meditate, consider, remark upon.
Commerce.—See Merchant.
Commodious.—Commodity. Lat. commodus, convenient, suitable, advantageous.
Commodore. Fr. commandeur, a governor or commander ; Port. commenda-dor, from whence the term seems to have come to us.
Common.—Commonalty.—Commune.—Communicate. Lat. communis, common, general, Fr. communitas, the having of things in common, fellowship, Fr. communauté, the common people ; Lat. communico, to impart, give a share of, hold intercourse with.
Compact. Lat. compactus, thickset, firm, from compingo, -actum, to put or join together ; pango, pactum, to drive in, fasten.
Compact. An agreement ; compaciscor, compactus, to agree with ; paciscor, to stipulate, engage, make a bargain.
Company.—Companion. It. compagno, compagnia. Mid. Lat. companium, association, formed from con and panis, bread, in analogy with the OHG. gi-mazo or gi-leip, board-fellow, from mazo, meat, or leip, bread. Goth. gahlaiba, fellow-disciple, Joh. xi. 16, from hlaibs, bread. Compain, one who eats the same bread with one.—Jaubert. Gloss. du Milieu de la Fr.
Compare. Lat. comparare, to couple things together for judgment, from compar, equal, and that from con and par, like, equal, a pair. But the meaning might equally be derived from the original sense of the verb parare, which seems to be to push forwards. Thus the simple parare is to push forwards, to get ready ; se-parare, to push apart, to separate ; com-parare, to push together, to bring into comparison, or to prepare, to accumulate.
Compass. Fr. compas, a compass, a circle, a round ; compasser, to compass, encircle, begird, to turn round.—Cot. To go about, from con and passus, a step. A pair of compasses is an instrument for describing circles. The mariner's com-pass is so called because it goes through the whole circle of possible variations of direction. To compass an object is to go about it or to contrive it.
Compatible. It. compatire, Fr. compatir, to sympathise, suffer with. See Passion.
Compendious. Lat. compendium, a saving, sparing, shortening, short cut. The word seems to be formed in opposition to dispendium, a spending, by the contrast between the particles con, together, and dis, apart : an abstinence from spending. Pendo, pensum, to weigh, to pay.
Compensate. Lat. compensare, to weigh together or one against the other. Pendo, pensum, to weigh.
Compete. — Competent. Lat. peto, to seek, to aim at, to go to a place; competo, to seek together for a thing, to compete ; also to come or meet together, to be suitable, to have requisite strength.
Compile. Lat. compilo (con and pilo, to pillage : See Pill, Pillage), to spoil, plunder, to bring together from different sources.
Complacent. — Complaisant. Lat. complaceo, Fr. complaire, -plaisant, to please, delight, be obsequious to.
Complexion. Lat. complexio, a combination, connection, physical constitution, applied in modern E. to the colour of the skin, as marking a healthy or unhealthy constitution. Fr. complexion, the making, temper, constitution of the body, also the disposition, affection, humours of the mind.—Cot.
Complicity. — Accomplice. Lat. complico, to fold or plait together ; complex, Fr. complice, one bound up with, a partner in crime. See -plic.
To Comply. — Compliment. To comply is properly to fulfil, to act in accordance with the wishes of another, from Lat. complere, as supply, Fr. suppléer, from supplere. The It. has compiere, complire, compire, to accomplish, complete, also to use compliments, ceremonies, or kind offices and offers.—Fl. The E. comply also was formerly used in the latter sense, as by Hamlet speaking of the ceremonious Osric. ‘ He did comply with his dug before he sucked it.’ The addition of the preposition with is also an It. idiom : compire con uno, to perform one's duty by one ;—col suo dovere, to do one's duty ; alla promessa, to perform one's promise. Non posso compire con tutti alla volta, I cannot serve all at a time.—Altieri. Hence compimenti, complimenti, obliging speeches, compliments.
Comprehend. See -prehend.
Comrade. Fr. camerade, a chamber-ful, a company that belongs to one chamber, tent, cabin.—Cot. Then applied to one of the company, a chamber-fellow. From It. camera, a chamber. Sp. camerada in both senses.
Con-, col-, com-, cor-. The Lat. prep. cum, with, corresponding to Gr. σvv, ξυν, takes in composition the foregoing forms in accordance with the organic nature of the following consonant. It signifies in general union or united action, and may be illustrated by Fin. koko, gen. ko'on, a heap, the locative cases of which are used in the sense of the Lat. con, or E. together. Pane kokoon or ko'olla, literally, put in a heap, collect ; tulewat kokoon or ko'olle, they come together.
To Con. To learn, to study, to take notice of. Ale-conner, an inspector of ales. To con one thanks, Fr. savoir gré, to feel thankful and to make the feeling known to the object of it. AS. cunnan, to know, cunnian, to inquire, search into, try. Gecunnian hwylc heora swiftost hors hæfde, to try which of them had the swiftest horse. He cunnode tha mid his handa, he felt them with his hand. Goth. kunnan, to know ; anakunnan, to read ; gakunnan, to observe, to read ; kannjan, to make known. Sw. kunna, to be able ; kunnig, known, knowing, skilful, cunning ; känna, to know, to feel, to be sensible.
Conceal. Lat. celo, Goth. huljan, OE. to hele, hill, to cover, hide.
Concert. Agreement. According to Diez from concertare, to contend with, but the explanation of Calvera, which he mentions, is more satisfactory. The Lat. has serere, to join together, interweave (whence sertum, a wreath of flowers), and tropically to combine, compose, contrive. The compound conserere is used much in the same sense, to unite together in action ; conserere sermonem, to join in speech ; consertio, a joining together. Hence It. conserto, duly wrought and joined together, a harmonious consort, an agreement ; consertare, to concert or interlace with proportion, to agree and accord together, to sing, to tune or play in consort.—Fl. When the word conserto was thus applied to the accord of musical instruments, it agreed so closely both in sense and sound with concento, Lat. concentus (cantus, melody, song), harmony, harmonious music, that the two seem to have been confounded together, and conserto, borrowing the c of concento, became concerto, whence the Fr. and E. concert. In English again the word was confounded with consort, from Lat. consors, -sortis, partaking, sharing, a colleague, partner, comrade.
Right hard it was for wight which did it hear To read what manner musick that mote be ; For all that pleasing was to living ear Was there consorted in one harmonee, Birds, voices, instruments, winds, waters, all agree.—F. Q. in R.
Muta di violoni, a set or consort of viols.—Fl.
Conciliate.—Reconcile. Lat. concilio, to full or thicken woollen cloth, thence to bring together, to conjoin, to procure. It seems to be the equivalent of Gr. συμπιλόω, to felt, from πίλος, wool, felt, as in so many other instances where p and c or k replace each other.
Conclave. Lat. clavis, key ; conclave, an apartment under lock and key ; hence a party or council meeting and deliberating in such an apartment, or in guarded privacy.
Concord. Lat. cor, cordis, heart ; concordia, union of hearts, agreement, and fig. agreement of notes, harmony.
Concubine. Lat. concubina, from concumbo, to lie down together. Cf. Gr. παράκοιτις, Clevel. laybeside.
Condign. Lat. dignus, condignus, fitting, worthy.
Condiment. Lat. condio,-ire, to season meat.
Condition. Lat. condo, conditum, to set together, to lay up in store, to arrange, dispose, establish ; conditio, the putting together, the nature, condition or circumstances of a thing.
Conduit. Fr. conduire, -duit, to conduct, lead ; conduit, a watercourse, a gutter or trench whereby water is led to a place. See -duce.
Cone. Lat. conus. Gr. κῶνος, a cone, a spinning top, fir-cone, pine-tree, pitch.
Coney. Lat. cuniculus. It. coniglio, Fr. conil, connin, Du. konijn, G. kungele, kunele (Kil.), kunigel, kuniglin (Dief.), ON. kuningr, w. cwning. The name is said by Pliny and other writers to be originally Spanish, and through the Latin it seems to have spread to the Germanic and Celtic stocks. In several of the forms above cited the name seems to signify king or little king, and thus was translated into Boh. kraljk, a prince or little king, also a rabbit or coney. See Dief. Orig. Eur. 308.
Confection. Lat. conficio, -fectum, to get together, compose, prepare, work ; confectio, a preparation.
Confess. Lat. fateor, fassum, confiteor, -fessum, to acknowledge, avow, confess, to manifest.
Congeal. Lat. gelu, frost, severe cold ; congelo, to become solidified by the action of cold.
Conglomerate. Lat. globus (corresponding to E. clod), a ball, thick round body ; glomus, a ball of thread ; glomero, conglomero, to roll or heap up into a mass.
Congruity.—Incongruous. Lat. congruo, to come together, to happen at the same time, to accord ; congruus, suitable, agreeing, fit.
Conjugal. Lat. conjux, -jugis, a consort, husband or wife, properly perhaps a yoke-fellow, from jugum, a yoke ; but ultimately from jungo, to join.
Conjure. Lat. jurare, to swear ; conjurare, to combine together by an oath, but in the E. application to bind by an oath, to call upon some one by the most binding sanctions, hence (with the accent on the first syllable) to conjure, to use enchantments to exorcise the supernatural powers, and ultimately to use juggling tricks or sleight of hand.
Connive. Lat. conniveo, -nixi, to wink with the eyes, to take no notice of ; nicto, to wink ; nicere manu, to beckon with the hand. G. nicken, Du. knicken, to nod, to wink. For the relation between nico or nicto and niveo comp. nix, nivis, snow. The ultimate root is the representation of the sound of a snap or crack by the syllable knick, knip. G. knicken, Du. knippen, to snap, crack. The term is then applied to any short sharp movement. Met de oogen knippen, knipoogen, to wink or twinkle with the eyes.
Conqueror. Lat. quærere, to seek, conquirere, to seek for, to seek out, obtain by seeking. Fr. conquerir, to get, purchase, acquire, and hence to get the victory, to subdue, overcome.
Consider. Lat. considere, to observe, consider, reflect ; a figure, according to Festus, from the observation of (Lat. sidera) the stars.
Constable. The Master of the Horse, or great officer of the empire who had charge of the horses, was called comes stabuli, the count of the stable, comestabilis, conestabilis, &c. To this officer, in the kingdoms which sprang up out of the ruins of the empire, fell the command of the army and the cognisance of military matters. ' Regalium præpositus equorum, quem vulgo Comistabilem vocant.'—Armoin in Duc. ' Comitem stabuli sui quem corrupte constabulum appellamus.—Greg. Turon. in Duc. ' Coram comite Herefordiensi, qui secundum anti-quum jus constabularius esse dignoscitur regii exercitus.'—Math. Westm. in Duc.
The term was then applied to the com-mander of a fortress or any detached body of troops, and in this sense the title still remains in the Constable of the Tower, the Constable of Chester Castle.
The Constable then became the officer who commanded in any district on behalf of the king. ' In villis vero vel urbibus vel castellis quæ regis subsunt dominio, in quibus constabularii ad tempus sta-tuuntur.'—Concil. Turon. A. D. 1163 in Duc.
Thus in England the term finally set-tled down as the designation of the petty officer who had the charge of the king's peace in a separate parish or hamlet.
Constant. Lat. consto, to stand to-gether, stand firmly, to remain, endure.
Consternation. Lat. sterno, stratum, to scatter, strew, throw to the ground; consterno, to throw down, and fig. to terrify.
Constipation. Lat. constipatio (con and stipo, to cram, pack closely, Gr. στείβω), a crowding or pressing together.
Construe.—Construct. See Structure.
Consult. Lat. consulo, -sultum, to de-liberate, take advice.
Contact.—Contagion.—Contiguous.—Contingent. See Tact, -tag.
Contaminate. Lat. contamino, to make foul, pollute, stain.
Contemn.—Contempt. Lat. temno, contemno, to despise.
Contemplate. Lat. contemplor (perf. p. contemplatus), to survey, behold or gaze at steadily.
Contest. Lat. testis, a witness; con-testor, to call to witness; contestari litem. It. contestare una lite, to bring a cause before the judge for his decision on the evidence, to commence the pleading; thence It. contestare, to wrangle. Thus the verb to contest is older than the noun.
Contra-.—Contrary.—Counter. Lat. contra, Fr. contre, against, in opposition to. Passing through Fr. into E. the word became counter, frequently used in com-position. Hence Fr. encontrer, rencon-trer, to meet, to encounter. Rencontre, a meeting, a rencounter.
Contrast. Fr. contraste, withstand-ing, strife, contention.—Cot. It. con-trastare, to stand opposite, to withstand, contest, wrangle; contrasto, contrastanza, an opposing, contention. From contra, against, and stare, to stand.
Contrive. Fr. trouver, to find, invent, light on, meet with, get, devise; con-trouver, to forge, devise, invent out of his own brain.—Cot.
Thise fals men togidere Thise thre ageyn Edward made a compasse-ment— ' Of that fals controueyng gaf thei jugement.
R. Brunne 255.
It. trovare, to find, invent, or seek out. According to Diez from turbare, to disturb, to turn over in searching through, supporting his theory by the OPtg. trovare = turbare; Neap. stru-vare = disturbare; controvare = contur-bare. But the G. treffen, to hit, to reach, to come to, comes very near the notion of lighting on. Jemanden treffen, to meet with or find one. Compare Sw. hitta, to hit on, find, discover, contrive.
Ne 's eschacent ne 's emoevent Mais od les branz nuz s'entretrœvent.
Benoit. Chron. Norm. 2. 5335.—they strike each other with naked blades.
Control. Fr. contrerolle, the copy of a roll of accounts, &c. Contreroller, to keep a copy of a roll of accounts.—Cot. Hence to check the accounts of an officer, to overlook, superintend, regulate.
Controversy.—Controvert. Lat. verto, -versum, to turn; verso, to turn about; versor, to be occupied about a thing; controversor, to litigate, contend, dispute.
Contumacy. Lat. contumax, obstinate, unyielding.
Contumely. Lat. contumelia, mis-usage, insult, affront. Supposed to be connected with temno, to despise.
Convent.—Conventicle. Lat. con-ventus, a coming together, meeting, as-sembly. See -vene. In M.Lat. the term was applied to the church or meeting-place of the faithful, while the contempt-uous name of conventiculum was given to the assemblies of heretics. Conventus was also applied to the council-chamber or meeting-place in a monastery, or to the college or body of monks.
Ut greges dudum Coenobiorum permitterent adunari Deique ad laudem sub uno Abbate unum conventum effici.—Ord. Vital, in Duc.
The term has finally come to signify a house of nuns.
Convex. Lat. convexus, vaulted, arched over, also hollow. From veho, vexum, to carry; but how the sense is attained is not well made out.
Convey.—Convoy. The tendency to a thin or a broad pronunciation of the vowels prevailing in different dialects of

Fr. converted Lat. via into veie (Chron. Norm. ; L. des Rois), or voie, way ; and the same variation is found in enveier, envoyer, It. inviare, to set in the right way, to send unto—Fl., and in conveier, conveyer, It. conviare, to make way with, to conduct. ' Del ciel enveiad! ' Tut li poples de Juda out li rei conveied.'—L. des Rois. From the thin Norman pro-nunciation was formed E. convey, while convoy has been borrowed from a more recent state of the Fr. language. No doubt a reference to Lat. convehere has affected some applications of convey, as when a carriage is called a convey-ance.

Convivial. Lat. vivo, to live ; con-vivo, to eat or live with ; conviva, a guest, convivium, a feast.

Coo. Imitative of the noise of doves, formerly written croo ; Du. korren, kir-ren, ON. kurra, Fr. roucouler, to croo like a dove.—Cot. To croo, crook, or mourn as a dove.—Fl. Mod.Gr. κουκου-βακιζω.

Cook. Lat. coquus, a cook ; coquere, to cook, to prepare by fire. The primi-tive sense seems, however, to be to boil, from an imitation of the noise of boil-ing water. G. kocken, to boil ; das blut kocht in seinen adern, the blood boils in his veins. Fin. kuohua, kuohata, to foam, bubble, boil, swell ; kuohina, the boiling as of a cataract or of the waves. Mod. Gr. κοχλάζω, to boil, boil with a noise, bubble. Esthon. kohhisema, rauschen, brausen, to murmur, roar. Galla koka, to boil, to cook.—Tutschek. The sound of tattling is constantly represented by the same syllables as the noise of agitated water. Hence we may compare Pl.D. kakeln, to chatter or cackle, or kikel kakel! for the sound of chatter, with kaken, to boil.

Cool. ON. kul, kula, a cold blast ; kula, to blow, to be cold ; kulbord, the windward side of the ship ; kulldi, cold ; at kala, to blow cold, to suffer from cold ; kaldi, cold. OHG. chuoli, G. kühl. See Cold.

Coomb. A half quarter, or measure of four bushels. Fr. comble, heaped measure. Or is it from the Du. kom, a trough, a chest, deep dish?

Coop.—Cooper.—Cub. Lat. cupa, Sp. Cuba, Fr. cuve, Du. kuype, a tub, cask. Sp. cubero, a cooper. The Sp. cuba is also a hen-coop. It. cuba, a couch, bed, coop or pen for poultry. Du. kuype der stad, the circuit of the town, the space confined within the walls ; kuypen, to bind casks. To coop is to pen or confine in a narrow space. The OE. cub, to con-fine, seems a different form of the same root. Art thou of Bethlehem's noble college free Stark staring mad that thou wouldst tempt the sea Cubbed in a cabin, on a mattress laid. Dryden in R. Pl.D. bekubbelt is used in the same sense, confined, pressed for room. Sp. encubar, to put a criminal into a tub by way of punishment. W. cwb, a hut, pen or cote ; cwb-iar, a hen-coop ; cwb-ci, a dog-kennel ; cwb-colomen, a dove-cote. Dan. kube, a hive ; kove, a hut, hovel ; torve-kube, torve-kove, a turf-shed. AS. cofa, Sw. kofwa, a chamber. Holstein kuuve, a bed of poor people, a cot ; Pl.D. kave, kaven, a small enclosed place, a pen, kalver-kaven, swiene-kaven, a calf or swine-pen. G. koben, a hollow re-pository, a chamber ; schweins-koben, a hog-stye ; kobel, a cote, cot ; tauben-kobel, a dove-cote ; siech-kobel, a hovel for lepers. Probably cabin must be reckoned in the same class of words. The radical idea seems that of bending round. Gael. cub, crouch, stoop, shrink, cubach, bent, hollowed ; cuba, a bed ; culb, a bending of the body, a pannier. As the liquid is exceedingly movable in words beginning with cr, cl, ch, &c., it is pro-bable that the Gael. cub must be con-nected with crub, to squat, crouch, crilb, a claw, crubach, a hook, a crooked woman, crup, to contract, shrink, crouch, &c. Thus ' cubbed in a cabin' would be radically identical with Shakespeare's ' cribbed, cabined, and confined.'

Coot. A water-fowl, called also a moor-hen.—B. The two are often con-founded, and in the moor-hen the short white tail bobbing up and down, with a motion like that of the tail of a rabbit, is a very conspicuous object. Now as the latter animal is from this cause called bunny, from Gael. bun, a stump, it is probable that the name of the coot is also taken from the tail. W. cwt, a little piece, a short tail ; cwta, cwtog, bobtailed, cwt-iar (iar = hen), bobtailed hen, a coot or water-hen.

Cop. W. cop, coppa, the top of any-thing, crown of the head ; coppog, crested ; coppyn, a small tuft or crest. Du. kop, the head. Wall. topett, top. The expression for a knob, bunch, or projection, is very often taken from the designation of a blow (see Boss), and the two senses are often united in the root kop. Magy. kop, sonus pulsu editus; kopogni, to stamp or clatter with the feet; kophal (hal = fish), gobio, the bull-head, a fish with a large head; Fin. kop-pata, to tap; kopsia, to knock, beat, smack; kopina, the noise of a blow; W. cobio, to thump; cob, a thump, also a top or tuft; cobyn, a tuft, bunch, cluster; Cat. cop, a blow; Sp. copa, the boss of a bridle; copo, bunch of flax on a distaff; copete, tuft, top, summit.
Cope. It. cappa, Sp. capa, Fr. châpe, Sw. kapa, G. kappe, a cape, cloak, cope or priest's vestment. In a met. sense, the cope of heaven. It. la cappa del cielo, Fr. la chappe du ciel, Du. hulle or kappe des hemels (hulle, caphium, velamen mulie-bre), is the arch or vault of heaven. Du. kap, kappe, a cap, hood, summit of a building. G. kappe also is specially ap-plied to the vault of an oven, the roof of a gallery in mining. Sp. copa, crown of a hat, roof or vault of an oven. The coping of a wall is a layer of tiles project-ing over the top and sheltering the wall. To cope, jut or lean out, forjecter.—Sher-wood.
To Cope. To encounter, meet in bat-tle, strive for the mastery.
So kene thei acuntred at the coupyng togadre. William & Werwolf, 3602.
Ageyn hym came Johan, sone of the Duke of Brennes, and coped togyder so fyersly that they brake theyr speres.—Paris and Vienna (Rox-burgh Lib.), p. 18.
OFr. colp, cop, a blow; chopper, to strike or knock against.
Copesman.—Copesmate. To cope, to barter or truck.—B. Copeman, a customer; copesmate, a partner in mer-chandise, companion. Du. koop, chaffer, exchange; koop-man, a merchant. See Chop.
Copious. Lat. copia, plenty.
Copper. Lat. cuprum. G. kupfer.
Copperas. Fr. couperose, It. copparosa, from Lat. cupri rosa, Gr. χαλκανθον, the flower of copper; rose for flower.
Coppice.—Copse. OFr. copeiz, copeau, wood newly cut; coppuis, right of cutting the waste branches of trees.—Roquef. From couper, to cut. What we call cop-pice or copse is in Fr. bois taillis. Gr. κοπάδες, arbores cæduæ—Hesychius in Junius, from κόπτω, to cut.
Copy. Lat. copia, abundance, and tropically, means, opportunity of doing anything. Copiam exscribendi facere, to give the means of writing out a docu-ment, of taking a copy, whence copia came to be used in the sense of copy.
Coquette. Fr. coqueter, a cock to call his hens, or to cluck as a cock among hens; to swagger or strout it as a cock among hens; coquette, one who lays her-self out for the admiration of the male sex, as the cock does for the female.
Cor-. See Con-.
Corbel.—Corbet. A shouldering piece or jutting out in walls to bear up a post, summer, &c.—B. From being made in the shape of a basket. Fr. corbeau. It. corva, corbella, a corbel, and also a basket.
Cord. Lat. chorda, Gr. χορδή, gut, then the string of a musical instrument, because made of gut. In E. applied to strings made of any other material.
-cord.—Cordial. Hearty, good for the heart. Lat. cor, cordis, the heart.
From the heart taken as the seat of the affections and the mind are Lat. Con-cordia, discordia, concord, discord; M. Lat. accordare, to accord or cause to be of one mind. Fr. recorder, to call to mind, to remember.
Cordovan.—Cordwainer. Fr. cordo-van, originally leather from Cordova. Cordouanier (a worker in Cordovan leather), a shoemaker.—Cot.
Core. The core of an apple. Fr. cœur, heart, also the core of fruit.—Cot. Sp. corazon, the heart; corazon de una pera, manzana, the core of a pear, apple. So Esthon. sudda, the heart, the core of an apple. Fin. sydän, the heart, what-ever is in the middle, the wick of a can-dle, pith of a tree, kernel of a nut, &c.
Cork. Sp. corcho, from Lat. cortex, as Sp. pancho, paunch, from pantex. It is possible however that the word may be connected with Lat. cortex, and yet not be direct from a Lat. source. The root cor is widely spread in the Slavonic and Fin. class of languages in the sense of rind, skin, shell, uniting the Lat. corium, skin, with cortex, bark. Fin. kuori, bark, shell, crust, cream; Lap. karr, bark, shell, karra, hard, rough; Esthon. koor, rind, shell, bark, cream; korik, crust. Magy. kereg, rind, crust, bark; kereg-dugó (dugó=stopper), a stopper of bark, a cork; kereg-fa, a 'cork tree, kérges, barky, hard. Bohem. kůra, kůrka, bark, crust; Pol. kora, bark of a tree; korek, koreczek, cork, korek-z-kory (a stopper of bark), a cork; —drewniany, a stopper of wood,—szklanny, of glass; Russ. korka, the rind of fruits, crust of bread, cork.

Cormorant. Fr. cormorant, corbeau de mer, It. corvo marino, agreeing with Bret. morvran, from mor, sea, and bran, a crow.
Corn. Goth. kaurn, corn; kaurno, a grain. OHG. kerno; MG. kerne; ON. kiarni; Du. keerne, a grain, kernel. Bohem. srno, Pol. ziarno, a grain.
Cornelian. Fr. cornaline. It. cornalino. A flesh-coloured stone easy to be engraved upon.—Cot. From cornu, horn, because of the colour of the finger-nail. For the same reason it is in Gr. called ὄνυξ, the nail.—Diez. Others derive it from carneus, because flesh-coloured. But the true derivation is probably from the semi-transparency of the stone resembling horn. G. hornstein, cornelian, chalcedony, agate.
Corner. Lat. cornu, Fr. corne, a horn, whence cornière, a corner. Comp. ON. horn, signifying both horn and corner.
L'une des cornieres leva Et l'autre à sa fille bailla.
Fab. et Contes, 2, 85.
Cornet. A musical instrument. Fr. cornet, from corne, horn. Also the standard of a troop of horse, or the officer who bore it, corresponding to an ensign of foot. It. cornetta, that ensign which is carried by lancers on horseback.—Fl. Fr. cornette, a cornet of horse, and the ensign of a horse company.—Cot.
Cornice. It. cornice, Fr. corniche, Wal. coronise. Gr. κορώνη, κορωνίς, a summit, finish, or completion of anything ; κορωνίδα ἐπιτιθέναι, to put the finishing stroke to a thing. The Gr. κορωνίς and Lat. corona (and in all probability also coronis) were also used in the sense of a cornice, or projection at the top of the wall of a building, τὸ τελευταῖον τῆς οἰκοδομῆς ἐπίθεμα.—Hesych. As the Gr. κορώνη also signified a crown, the sense of a summit or completion may arise from the notion of crowning, as we say ' a crowning grace,' or as in the expression Finis coronat opus.
Coroner.—Coronet. Lat. corona, a crown. Coronator, the Coroner, was the official whose special duty was to look after the rights of the crown in a district. 'Judex coronæ, qui vulgo dicitur Coroner.'—Will. Thorn in Duc. A.D. 1367.
Corporal. It. capo, head ; caporale, caporano, a corporal of a band of men, a chief man or commander—Fl. ; Fr. caporal, Rouchi coporal, corporal, a corporal.
Corporal.—Corporation.—Corpulent. Lat. corpus, -poris, body ; corporatio, an assumption of body ; corpulentus, gross or bulky of body.
Corps.—Corpse.—Corse.—Corset.—Corselet. Lat. corpus, It. corpo, Fr. corps, OFr. cors, body. Hence corps, a body of troops ; corpse, corse, a dead body ; It. corpicello, corparello (Fl.), Fr. corset, a little body, also a pair of bodies for a woman ; It. corsaletto, corsetto, a corselet, or armour for the body. So G. leib, body ; leibchen, little body, a woman's bodice.
Corridor. Fr. corridor, a passage, It. corridore, a runner, a long gallery, terrace, walk, upper deck of a ship.—Fl. See Courier.
Corrody. Money or provisions due to the king as founder from a religious house, for the maintenance of one that he appoints for that purpose. Mid.Lat. conredium, corredum, conradium, corrodium, &c. ' Quicquid ad alimentum ad mensam datur ; præbenda monachi vel canonici.'—Duc. It. corredare, to fit out, furnish, set forth. See Array.
Corsair. It. corsaro, corsale, a pirate. From Sp. corsa, corso, a cruise or course at sea ; Lat. cursus.—Diez. But the Mod.Gr. has κούρσον, currency, τὸ κούρσην τῶν ἐχθρῶν, prey ; κουρσεύω, to plunder, rob, act the pirate ; κουρσάρτης, κουρσατής, a robber, pirate.
Corselet. See Corps.
Corsned. A piece of ordeal bread, by eating which a person accused of crime was allowed to clear himself in certain cases. A prayer was uttered over the morsel to be eaten that it might choke the person accused if guilty, and the curse was solemnised by marking the corsned with the sign of the cross. Thus the word may be explained from AS. snæd, bit, morsel, ON. snæd, food, as signifying either the morsel of the curse or execration, or as the crossed morsel. Da. korse, to mark with the sign of the cross. A curse is an imprecation sanctioned by the sign of the cross. When Earl Godwin was suspected of the murder of the king's brother he proposed to clear himself by the corsned, and is represented by Philippe Mouskes as saying to the king— Bien sai que vous me mescrées De vo frere ki fu tués, Mais trestout aussi voirement Puisse jou manger sainement Cest morsel de pain que je tieng, Que par efort, ne par engien N'eue coupe en la mort vo frere— Lors saina li rois le morsiel.
After Godwin's imprecation the king signed the cross on the morsel, and the guilty Godwin was accordingly choked. In the account of the same transaction in the Roman de Rou the signing of the cross on the corsned is also specially mentioned.
—Je sai bien qu'il s'estrangla D'un morsel que le Roi seigna, A Odihan ou il manja.
In a Gl. of the time of Edw. III. corsned is rendered panis conjuratus, the bread of exorcism or execration.
The word is explained by Grimm as the morsel of trial or of judgment, from OHG. kiusan, to try, discern, judge, whence koron, koren, to try, kuri, MHG. kiir, AS. eyre, trial, judgment, choice.
Fris. korbita, corsned.
Corvette. Lat. corbita, a large ship for traffic, Sp. corbeta, Pg. corveta, Fr. corvette.

Cosmetic. — Cosmogony. — Cosmopolitan. Gr. κοσμητικός, skilled in the art of adornment, from κοσμῶ, to array, decorate, adorn. Κόσμος, order, arrangement, the universe; κοσμογονία, the world's origin; κοσμοπολίτης, a citizen of the world.
Cosset. A lamb brought up by hand, a pet. It. casiccio, a tame lamb bred by hand—Fl., from casa, house, as in Suffolk, cot-lamb. Wal. cosset, a sucking pig, is probably unconnected.
Cost. Lat. constare, Fr. couster, couter, to stand one in, to cost.
Costive. Fr. constipé, constipated, bound in the belly; Lat. constipare, from stipare, to cram, to stuff. It. costipativo, having a tendency to constipate, whence by contraction costive.
Costume. See Custom.
Cosy.—To Cose. Cosie, snug, warm, comfortable; cosh, quiet, snug, intimate. They are sitting very cosh: i.e. close to each other.—Jam. To cose, to converse with familiarity.—Hal. A cose in familiar speech is a private and sociable conversation. G. kosen, to chat, talk confidentially. 'So kosten sie die nacht entlang.' Gekose, koserei, chat, tattle.
The primary signification of the word seems to be the sound of whispering, and it is applied in MHG. to the murmuring of water. 'Horte man da kosen diu wazzer unde runen.'—Benecke. Sc. cushle-mushle, low whispering conversation, muttering.—Jam. Couster, which is sometimes used in the sense of chat or cose, may be compared with whister, whisper. See Cuddle.

Cot.—Cottage. Fin. koti, a dwelling-place, house; kota, a poor house, cottage, kitchen; koti-ma (ma = land), country. Esthon. koddo, house.
Cot, 2.—Cote. Probably cote, a pen or shelter for animals, may be identical with cot in the last sense. We have sheep-cote, dove-cote; Du. duive-kot, hoen-kot, honde-kot, a dove-, hen-, dog-cote. In this language kot is widely used in the sense of hollow receptacle; kot, tugu-rium, cavum, latibulum, caverna, loculamentum, locus excavatus. 'De leden wt de kote doen,' to put limbs out of joint.—Kil. W. cwt, a cot, hovel, sty. Cwtt, a cottage, cwtt moch, a hog-sty.—Richards.
Cot, 3. The primary sense of the nearly obsolete cot is a matted lock. G. zote, a cot, a lock of hair or wool clung together.—Ludwig. Cot-gare, refuse wool so clotted together that it cannot well be pulled asunder; cottum, cat or dog-wool (properly cot or dag-wool) of which cotts or coarse blankets were formerly made.—Bailey. Cotted, cottered, cotty, matted, entangled.—Hal. Lang. coutou, flock (bourre), wool, cotton; cozitis, matted; coutisses, dag-locks, the tail-wool of sheep.—Cousin.
The term is then applied to a fleece, mat, rug of shaggy materials, to a covering or loose garment made of such materials, to an inartificial sleeping-place, where a rug or mat may be laid down for that purpose.
Wal. cote, sheepskin, fleece; E. dial. cot, a fleece of wool matted together in its growth, a door-mat made of a cotted fleece.—Baker. G. kotze, a rough, shaggy covering, a shaggy overcoat worn by peasants; kotzet, cotted, shaggy.—Adelung. Fin. kaatu, a rough coverlet of sheep-skins. The Mid.Lat. cottus, cotta, cottum were used in both senses, of a rug or coarse woollen mat used by the monks as bedding, and of the single garment, made of similar material, covering the whole body. 'Accipit incola cellæ ad lectum paleam, filtrum, si possit haberi, sin autem (but if not), pro eo pannum grossum simplicem non duplicatum, pulvinar, cotum vel coopertorium de grossis ovium pellibus et panno grosso coopertum.'—Stat. Cartus. in Duc. Rugs of the foregoing description were either to lie on or to serve as coverings. 'Nec jaceant super cotos.' 'Super cotos in lecto quiescere.' 'Tunc, ait, ille es qui sub cotto quotidie completorium insusurras?'—Duc.
A cot, a sleeping-place in a ship, is properly a mat, then the place where a mat is laid for sleeping. The Mid.Lat. cotta, cottus, explained by Ducange, tunica clericis propria, corresponds to G. kutte, the cowl or hood, the distinctive part of a friar's dress. It is probable that the derivation of the word coat, in which all reference to the nature of the material is lost, must be traced to the same origin. We have above seen the same word (kotze) applied to a rough overcoat. And it is probable that the Mid.Lat. floccus, floccus, froccus, the frock of the monk, is in like manner derived from floccus, a flock of wool, referring to the shaggy material of which the frock was made. So also from Fin. takku, villus animalium defluus, maxime implicatus vel concretus, a cot or dag (whence takkuinen, cotted, matted, takku-willa, dag-wool), comes takki, an overcoat, perhaps explaining the origin of the Roman toga.

In the original signification of a matted lock cot is related on the one side to clot, and on the other to the Sc. tot, tait, G. zote. Fin. tutti, Sw. totte, a bunch of flax, wool, or fibrous material. We have seen under Catch examples of the equivalence of forms beginning with cl and a simple c respectively. And the Fr. motte, matte, a clot or clod, is identical with E. mat, an entangled mass of fibre, the primitive idea being simply a lump. The Lap. tuogge, a tangled mat of hair, is also applied to the lumps of paste in soup or gruel. It should be observed that the Sc. tottis is used, like G. kotze, for a coarse shaggy material.

Na dentie geir the Doctor seiks Of tottis russet his riding breiks.—Jam.

Coterie. From Lat. quotus, what in number, how many, are formed. It. quota, Pr. cota, Fr. cote, a quota or contribution; cotiser, to assess the contribution of one; coterie, an assembly, properly a club where each pays his part.

Cotquean.—Quotquean. An effeminate man, man interfering in women's concerns. Du. kutte. Fin. kutta, kuttu, the distinctive feature of a woman, thence as a term of abuse for a feeble, womanly man. In like manner Bav. fud, of the same original sense, is used in vulgar language for a woman, and contemptuously, as Gr. γυνή, for a womanish man. E. cot, cote, a man that busies himself in the affairs of the kitchen.—Bailey. Cot was also a term of abuse for a woman.

That lying cut is lost.—Gammer Gurton, v. 2. In cotquean the element signifying woman is repeated, as so often happens when the original form of the word has lost its significance.

Cotton. Sp. algodon, Arab. qoton, alqoton. The meaning would exactly agree with that of E. cot, a lock or flock. Lang. coutou, wool, flock, cotton. Noppe of wool or cloth, coton de tapis.—Palsgr.

Couch. Fr. coucher, OFr. culcher, to lay down; It. colcare, from Lat. collocare, con and locare, to lay. Sole collocato, au soleil couché.—Lex Salica. Menage. Cowchyn, or leyne things together, colloco.—Pr. Pm.

To Cough. Imitative of the noise. Du. kuch, a cough; kuchen, to pant, to cough.—Kil. Fin. kohkia, kohhia, to hawk, to cough, rauce tussio, screo. Esthon. kohhima, to cough; kohhatama, koggisema, to hawk up phlegm.

Coulter. Lat. culter, a ploughshare, a knife. Fr. coultre, a coulter. Lat. cultellus, a knife. This would look as if to cut were the primary meaning of colere, to till.

Council. Lat. concilium, an assembly or meeting of persons, explained as originally signifying a pressing together, from the source indicated under Conciliate. Corpora sunt porro partim primordia rerum, Partim concilia quae constant principiorum. Lucret.—by the pressing together of elements.

Counsel. Lat. consilium, Fr. conseil (probably from consulo, to deliberate, take advice), advice, deliberation.

Count. Fr. comte, from comes, comitis, a companion; the name given to the great officers of state under the Frankish kings.

To Count. Fr. compter, to reckon, calculate. Lat. computare; con and putare, to think.

Countenance. Fr. contenance, the behaviour, carriage, presence, or composition of the whole body.—Cot. Lat. continere, to hold together.

Counter-. See Contra-.

Counter. Fr. comptoir, a counter, or table to cast accounts.—Cot.

Counterpane.—Quilt, w. cylch, a hoop, circle; cylched, a bound, circumference, rampart, what goes round about or enwraps, bed-clothes, curtains. Gwely a'i gylchedau, a bed and its furniture. Gael. coilce, a bed, bed-clothes; coilce-adha, bed materials, as feathers, straw, heath. Bret. golched, a feather-bed, chaff-bed. Hence the Lat. culcita, originally probably a wadded wrapper, but applied in Lat. to a mattress, and avowedly borrowed from the Gauls.
Sicut in culcitris praecipuam gloriam Cadurci obtinent, Galliarum hoc et tomenta pariter inventum.—Pliny.
The Du. kulckt, Sp. colcedra, colcha, It. coltre, Fr. coultre, coulte, mark the passage to the E. quilt.
When the stitches of the quilt came to be arranged in patterns for ornament it was called culcita puncta.
Estque toral lecto quod supra ponitur alto Ornatus causa, quod dicunt culcita puncta. Duc.
Nullus ferat secum in viâ punctam culcitram ad jacendum nisi is cui in capitulo concessum fuerit.—Ibid.
This in Fr. became coulte-pointe, coute-pointe, courte-pointe, and with that instinctive striving after meaning, which is so often the source of corruption in language, contre-pointe, as if from the opposite pits made by the stitches on either side of the quilt or mattress. Vêtu d'une robe contrepointée comme un malade.—Rev. des Deux Mondes, Feb. 15, 1860. Hence finally the E. counterpane.
Country. Fr. contrée, It. contrada (contra-ata), the district which lies opposite you, as G. gegend, a situation, Mid.G. gegenote, from gegen, opposite.—Diez.
Muratori suggests the Lat. conterraneus, a person of the same country, for which in Mid.Lat. was used conterratus. Occisus est Michael sub castello Mututæ ab ipsis conterratis.—Chron. A.D. 1040. Et omnes conterrati dispersi sunt; id est (says Muratori) cives ejusdem terræ.
Couple. Lat. copula, a tie, a rope; copulo, to tie or join together. It. cappio, a noose, snare, halter.
Courage. Fr. courage; It. coraggio, from Lat. cor, the heart.
Courier.—Course. Lat. curro, cursum. It. correre, Fr. courir, to run; It. corriere, Fr. courier, a runner, one sent on messages. Lat. cursus, a running, journey, course. Discurro, to run to and fro, to speak of a thing; discursus, conversation, discourse; concursus, a running together, concourse. In other cases the Lat. vowel remains unaltered, as in Incursion, Excursion.
Court. Fr. cour, It. corte, Lat. cohors, chors, cors, cortis, a cattle-yard, enclosed place. Cortes sunt villarum intra maceriem spatia.—Nonius. Portant secum crates et retia quibus cohortes in solitudine faciant.—Varro in Ihre, v. gard.

Allied with a numerous class of words signifying enclosure. Russ. gorod, a town, gorod'nya, a palisade, gorod'ba, an enclosure. Pol. grod, a town, grodz, enclosure, grodzki, belonging to a court; Bohem. hrad, a fortress, castle; hradba, enclosure; hraditi, to enclose, fortify.
Lat. hortus; Sw. gard, a yard, court, estate, house; E. yard. Magy. kert, a garden, kertelni, keritni, to enclose; keritek, kertelet, a hedge. Fin. kartano, a court, yard, farm.
Cousin. Fr. cousin; It. cugino; Lat. consobrinus,—whence Grisons cusdrin, cusrin; Sp. sobrino.—Diez.
Cove. A nook, a sheltered harbour. In secretis recessibus is translated by Holland, in secret coves or nooks.—Rich.
The relations of this word lead us in such a variety of directions that it is exceedingly difficult to make up our minds as to the original source of the signification.
Lat. cavus, hollow, Sp. cueva, a cave or grot, cellar, den of wild beasts, &c. Ptg. cova, a hole, ditch, pit; — dos olhos, eye-hole; — na barba, a dimple; covil, a den of wild beasts, a lurking-hole, covo, a coop for chickens. It. covare, to squat, brood, sit upon eggs, cova, covo, a den, covale, covaccio, a hatching nest, squatting form, lurking-hole; covile, coviglio, a kennel, sty, lurking-place, covigliare, to lurk or get into some secret place for shelter.
Looking at the latter forms we should be inclined to refer the word to the Lat. cubare, to lie, Gael. cùb, to crouch, stoop, bend, lie down, whence cùba, a bed, cùba-chuil, Lat. cubiculum, a bed-chamber, cubile, a resting-place, a lair of animals, identical with the It. covile, coviglia.
The idea of cooping or confining may be united with that of lying down, if we suppose that the primitive image expressed by the Lat. cubare, to lie down, is the act of curling oneself up for warmth in going to sleep. Compare Lap. krukahet, to lie down on the ground without a bed, with E. crook. Gael. cùb, a bending of the body, cùbach, bent, hollowed. Lat. cubitum, the elbow or bending of the arm.
In the Finnish and Slavonic languages we have Lap. kappe, kape, hollow, a cavern, ditch; kappet, to hollow out; Russ. kopat, to dig, to hollow; Fin. kopio, sounding as an empty vessel, empty, hollow; koppa, anything hollow or vaulted; kopano, a hollow trunk of a tree; kopero, koparet, a receptacle for small things, trench for keeping turnips; kopera, kowcra, hollowed, concave, curved, crooked. If the whole of these words are radically connected, the train of thought must begin with the sound characteristic of a hollow object, whence the idea of empty, hollow, concave, crooked, making crooked, curling oneself up, lying down.

Covenant. Lat. conventus, conventio (from convenire, to come together, to agree), an assembly, compact, covenant. Fr. convenir, to assemble, befit, accord with ; convenant, fit, comely, agreeing with, and as a subst. an agreement, contract. The n has been lost in E. covenant, as in OE. covent for convent ; Covent-garden.

Cover. Fr. couvrir, It. coprire, Lat. cooperire; con and operire, to cover.

Coverlet. Fr. couvre-lit, a bed-cover.

Covet. Fr. convoiter, by a false etymology, as if compounded with the preposition con. The real derivation is the Lat. cupidus, whence Prov. cobeitos, cubitos, cobes, covetous ; cupiditat, cobeitat, covetousness ; cobeitar, cubitar, to covet.—Diez.

Covey. A brood of partridges. Fr. couvée, from couver, It. covare, to hatch, brood, covey, squat or sit upon ; covata, a brood or covey.—Fl. Lat. cubo, to lie, incubo, to hatch.

Covin. A deceitful agreement between two to the prejudice of a third.—B. Lat. convenire, to agree. Lang. couvinens, covinen, convention, agreement, plot ; faire covinens, to concert, to plot. See Covenant.

Cow. Sanscr. gâ, gu, G. kuh. The bellowing of an ox may be imitated as well with an initial g as a b. Thus the ON. has gaula as well as baula, to bellow (to cry gau ! bau ! as Fr. miauler, to cry miau ! to mew) ; gauli as well as bauli, a bull. The Sanscr. gâ preserves the first of these forms, as the Gr. βους and w. bu, It. bue, the second.

* To Cow. ON. kuga, Sw. kufva, Dan. kue, to coerce, subdue, keep under. A parallel form with Dan. knuge, to squeeze, press down. Compare N. knippe and kippe, a bundle ; knubb and kubb, a block ; knart and kart, a lump, unripe fruit ; knoll and koll, a round top, crown of the head.

Coward. There is no doubt that the word comes from It. coda, OFr. coue. Wall. cow, a tail, but the precise course of the metaphor has been much disputed. It appears to me certain that the sense of timidity is taken from the figure of a hare, which was familiarly termed couard, the bobtailed. ' If eny [of your hounds] fynde of hym [the hare], where he hath ben, Rycher or Bemond, ye shall say, oiez à Bemond le vayllaunt, que quide trovere le coward, ou le court cow.'—Le Venery de Twety in Reliquiæ Antiquæ, p. 153. Kuwaerd, lepus, vulgo cuardus ; ignavus, imbellis, timidus.—Kil. The timidity of the hare is proverbial : Myd word he threteneth muche, and lute dethe in dede, Hys mouth ys as a leon, hys herte arne as an hare.—R.G. 457. If some such desperate hackster shall devise To rouse thy hare's heart from her cowardice. Bp. Hall in R. Some have thought that the name is taken from the figure of a terrified dog with his tail between his legs, as in Heraldry a lion so depicted was termed a lion couard. But it does not appear that putting his tail between his legs is a sign of fear in the case of a lion. In the original text I was led to explain the word as signifying a tailer, one who draws to the rear, shrinks backward : Quand de Narcissus me souvint A qui mallement mesadvint, Ly commençay à couarder.—R. R. 1525. In Chaucer's translation, I gan anon withdrawe me. Lap. murlct, to go backwards, to be timid, to fear.

To Cower. G. kauern, kauren, to squat, sit close to the ground ; ON. kura, to roost, to sit like a roosting bird ; N. kura, to droop the head, to rest, lie still, sleep in a bent posture, w. cwr, corner, nook ; cwrian, to cower. The fundamental image seems, making a hunch of oneself, crooking oneself together. The N. has kus, a crook or hump in the back, kusa seg, synonymous with kura seg, to crook oneself, bow down. Fin. kaare, bow, curvature ; kaarittaa, to bow, to curve, to go round ; Lap. karjot, to lie curled up like a dog.

Cowl. Lat. cucullus, Sp. cogulla, OFr. cuoule — Chr. Norm. ; as. cugle, cufle, cuhle, w. cwfl, Gael. cubhal, a monk's hood, cowl. Originally from the figure of a cock's comb. Illyr. kukman, kukmitza, kukljitza, a cock's comb, tuft on a bird's head, a hood ; kukulj, a cowl ; Bohem. chockol, crest on a bird's head, kukla, a hood ; Bav. gogkel, a cock, thence the cock's comb :—Es steigt einem der gogkel, gückel, his crest rises, he is enraged ; gugel, kugel, a cape, cowl.

**Cowl-staff.** A staff for carrying a tub that has two ears. Essex cowl, a tub.—Ray. Soo, or cowl, vessel: tina; cowle-tre, or soo tre: vectatorium.—Pr. Pm. Cowl itself is from Fr. cuveau (cuvel), cuve, Lat. cupa, Mid.Lat. cupella, G. kübel, a tub.

**Coxcomb.** A fop, from the hood worn by a fool or jester which was made in the shape of a cock's comb.

**Coy.** Fr. coi. It. cheto, Sp. quedo, quiet, noiseless, easy, gentle; Lat. quietus.

**Cozen.** It. coglione, a cullion, a fool, a scoundrel, properly a dupe. See Cully. It. coglionare, to deceive, make a dupe of. Rouchi coulionner, railler, plaisanter, to banter. Coule! interjection imputing a lie; a lie. Couleter, to tell lies. In the Venet. dialect coglionare becomes cogionare, as vogia for voglia, fogia for foglia. Cogionnare, ingannare, corbellare.—Patriarchi. Hence E. to cozen, as It. fregio, frieze; cugino, cousin; prigione, prison.

**Crab.** ON. krabbi, G. krebs, Bret. krab. There is little doubt that the animal is named from its great claws. W. crafange, a claw, talon, a crab-fish. OE. crapel, Bret. kraban, a claw. The ultimate origin is a representation of the sound of scraping or scratching, the primary office of claws, although those of the crab are not used for that purpose. W. crafu, Bret. krabiza, to scratch; Du. krabben, to scratch or scrape; Sp. carpir (with inversion of the liquid), to tear, scrape, scratch.

**Crab.** 2. A windlass for raising weights. The G. bock, a buck or he-goat, is used for a frame of wood to support weights or similar purposes. It signifies a battering-ram, coach-box, starlings or posts to break the ice above a bridge, the dogs in a fire grate, trestles to saw wood on, a painter's easel or ass. In a similar manner the Sp. cabra, a goat, was used as the designation of a machine for throwing stones; cabria, a crane. Fr. chevre, a goat, and also a machine for raising weights. In the Romance of the department of the Tarn the place of the r is transposed, and the word for a goat is crabo; crabit, a kid; and both these terms are used to designate the machine for raising weights, which we term in E. a crab, as well as trestles, or, like the G. bock, a bagpipe.—Dict. Romano-Castrais. For the reason why the name of the goat was applied to a machine for raising weights, see Cabria.

**Crabbed.** Crabbed writing is scratchy writing, difficult to read, and met. a crabbed style is a style hard to understand. Du. krabbelen, to scratch, to scribble or scrawl; krabbelschrift, a scrawl, ill-written piece; krabbelig, badly written, scrawled, crabbed.

**Crack.** Imitative of the sound made by a hard substance in splitting, the collision of hard bodies, &c. In Gaelic expressed by the syllable cnac, identical with E. knock or knack. Gael. cnac, crack, break, crash, the crack of a whip, &c.; cnag, crack, snap, knock, rap, thump.

**Cradle.** See Crate.

**Craft.** G. kraft, strength, power; AS. cræft, strength, faculty, art, skill, knowledge. The origin is seen in the notion of seizing, expressed by the It. graffiare. W. craff, a hook, brace, holdfast, creffyn, a brace, Bret. krafa, to seize. The term is then applied to seizing with the mind, as in the Lat. terms apprehend, comprehend, from prehendere, to seize in a material way. W. craffu, to seize with the understanding, to perceive; dyn craff, a man of quick comprehension; crefft, a trade.

**Crag.** 1. The neck, throat.—Jam. Du. kraage, the throat. Pol. kark, the nape, crag, neck. Bohem. krk, the neck; ON. krage, Dan. krave, the collar of a coat. The origin is an imitation of the noise made by clearing the throat. Bohem. krkati, to belch, krcati, to vomit; Pol. krzękać, to hem, to hawk. The same root gives rise to the Fr. cracker, to spit, and It. recere, to vomit; E. reach, to strain in vomiting; ON. hraki, spittle; AS. hraca, cough, phlegm, the throat, jaws; G. rachen, the jaws. At other times the guttural sound is imitated without the r, as in E. hawk and keck, and hence are formed W. ceg, the throat, mouth, E. choke and ON. kok, quok, the throat.

**Crag.** 2. A rock. Gael. creag, a rock; W. careg, a stone; caregos, pebbles.

**Cram.** AS. cramman, to stuff, to cram. Dan. kramme, to squeeze, press, strain; ON. kremja, Sw. krama, to press, crush, squeeze. Du. kramme, a cramp-iron, krammen, to clamp or cramp together. MHG. krimmen, kram, krummen, to press, seize with the claws. See Cramp.

**Crambe.**—**Crambo.** A repetition of words, or saying the same thing over again. From the Gr. proverb Δὶς κράμβη θάνατος, cabbage twice boiled is death; Lat. crambe repetita, a tedious repetition.

Hence probably crambo, a play in rhyming, in which he that repeats a word that was said before forfeits something.—B. Then call me curtal, change my name of Miles To Guiles, Wiles, Piles, Biles, or the foulest name you can devise To crambo with for ale. B. Jonson, Tale of a Tub, A. 4, sc. 1.

Cramp.—Crimp.—Crump. Fr. crampe, Du. krampe, G. krampf, spasm, cramp; Fr. crampon, Du. krampe, kramme, kram-meken, a cramp-iron, hook, clasp. Krim-pen, to contract, draw in, shrink; krimp-neusen, to draw up the nose; krimpinge, krimpsel, krimpe, contraction, spasm, cramp; krimpsel in den buyck, G. grim-men, krimmen, the gripes. MHG. krimmen, kram, krummen, to clutch with the talons, to tear, to climb, showing the origin of Fr. grimper, properly to clutch oneself up. Krimmende voghel, a hawk.—Kil. Sw. dial. kramm. Da. dial. kram, tight, scanty, close. ON. krappr, tight, narrow, crooked; kreppa, to press together, to contract, crook; kryppa, a hump on the back; krepphendr, having a crooked head. E. dial. crump, crooked; crump-shouldered, crumpfooted, humped or crooked in those members; crump, the cramp; crum, to stuff or cram; Sw. dial. krumpen, stiffened with cold; kramp, crooked, saddle-bow; G. krümp-en, krimpen, to shrink; krumm, Gael. crom, Bret. kroum, crooked.

The foregoing can hardly be separated from each other, but the stock branches out in a perplexing variety of directions, leading us to forms whose meaning seems radically to spring from totally distinct images. We may observe, however, that the foregoing forms beginning with gr or kr and others related to them exactly correspond to a parallel series in which the r is replaced by l. Thus we have grasp and clasp, gripe or grip and clip, cramp-iron and clamp-iron. Crump-footed corresponds to ON. klumbufotr; Gael. crub, a lame foot, to E. clubfoot; Fr. grimper to E. climb; scramble to clamber; ON. kramr, to the synonymous E. clammy; Du. krauwen to E. to claw. And as in the l series it was argued (under Clamp) that the radical image was a lump or round mass, from which the notion of sticking together, contracting, compressing, were derived, we may trace the origin of the r series to a form like W. crob, crwb, a round hunch, Gael. crub, the nave of a wheel, Fr. croupe, crape, the top or knap of a hill, It. groppo, gruppo, grappo, a bunch, knot. Then in the sense of drawing into a lump, Gael. crub, to crouch, cringe, squat; Fr. croupir, to crouch, bow, stoop, go double; ON. kropna, to draw together, to crook. E. dial. croopback, a humpback or crook-back. Sw. dial. kropp, crooked. The final p is first nasalised (as in crump) and then lost, being only represented by the nasalising liquid as in G. krumm or E. cram. The passage from crump to crimp is shown in G. krümpen, krimpen, to shrink.

Crane. G. kranich. W. garan, a crane, and also a shank, from gar, a leg; ga-ranawg, longshanked. The name however is very widely spread, and is found in some of the languages in the extremity of Siberia.

Crank.—Crankle.—Crinkle. To crankle or crinkle, to go in and out, to run in folds or wrinkles.—B. Du. kron-kelen, to curl, twist, bend; E. crank, an arm bent at right angles for turning a windlass; Lap. kränket, to crook, to bend; kränkem, the bending of the knee; Wall. cranki, to twist, to fork; Rouchi cranque, the cramp; Bret. krank. It. granchio, a crab, as the pinching animal; E. dial. cringle-crangle, zigzag—Hal.; ON. kringr, a ring or circle, kringlottr, round; Dan. kringel, crooked, kring (in composition), round. As the notion of a crumpled surface is often expressed by reference to a crackling noise (whether from the sound actually given in the crumpling up of textures of different kinds, especially under the influence of heat, or on the principle explained under Crisp, Cockle, &c.), probably crankle may be regarded as a nasalised form of crackle. Lith. krankti, to make harsh noises of different kinds, to snort, croak, hawk; E. crunkle, to cry like a crane; grank, to groan, or murmur.—Hal. * Crank. 2. Crank in nautical language is applied to vessels inclined to heel over. ON. kranga, Da. dial. krangle, to stagger, to go zigzagging. Comp. Dan. slingre, to reel or stagger, also to roll as a ship. Sw. kranga, Du. krengen, to press down a vessel on its side, to heel over.

* Cranky. Poorly. E. dial. cranks, pains, aches. When a man begins to feel the infirmities of age it is said in Rouchi ' qu'il a ses cranques.' Cranquieux, crangu'liaux, maladif.—Hécart. Crankle, weak, shattered.—Hal. G. krank, sick. From the complaining tone of a poorly person. Pl.D. krönken, to whimper. E. dial. grank, to groan, to murmur, granky, complaining.—Hal.
Cranny. Cranie, craine or cleft.—Minsheu. Rouchi crin (pronounced crain), a cleft or notch, s'crener, to chap. Fr. cren, crenne, cran, a breach or snip in a knife, &c., a notch, nib of a pen, jag about the edge of a leaf.—Cot. Bav. krinnen, Bret. cran, a notch, G. krinne, a rent, cleft, channel. From Ir. crinim, crainim, creinim, to bite, to gnaw, Bret. kriha, to gnaw. The metaphor may be illustrated by Cotgrave's explanation of Fr. cale, ' a bay or creek of the sea entering or eating into the land.'
On the other hand, it would be more in analogy with the other words signifying a crack or fissure, if it could be derived from a syllable crin, imitative of a sharp sound, while the Fr. crinon, a cricket, looks as if the chirp of that animal had been so represented. I should be inclined to refer the W. crinn, dry, to the same root, signifying in the first instance shrunk, as in Sussex a clung bat is a dry stick. To crine, to shrink, to pine.—Hal. A piece of wood in drying shrinks and cracks. G. schrund, a chink.
Crape. Fr. crêpe, a tissue of fine silk twisted so as to form a series of minute wrinkles. Crespe, curled, frizzled, crisp.—Cot. See Crisp.
Crash. An imitation of the noise made by a number of things breaking. A variety of clash, which is used in nearly the same sense. To crash or dash in pieces, sfracassare, spezzare.—Torriano. A word of the same class with craze, crush, &c.
Cratch. Fr. creiche, cresche, a cratch, rack, ox-stall, or crib. La sainte criche, the manger in which our Lord was laid. Diez would derive it from the It. greppia, Prov. crepia, crepcha (as Mid.Lat. apropiate, Prov. apropjar, apropchar; Fr. approcher), OFr. crebe, greche, a crib. ' En la crepia lo pauseron.' ' L'enfant envolupat en draps e pausat en la crupia.'—Rayn. ' And she baar her firste borun sone and wlappide him in clothes and leyde him in a cracche!'—Wicliff. See Crib. But the It. craticia (from Lat. crates, cratitius), a hurdle, lattice, sheep pen or fold, offers a simpler derivation. Hence the elision of the t would immediately give rise to the Fr. creiche, in the same way as it produces the Fr. creil, a hurdle (Roquefort), from the It. graticola, craticola, a grating.
Crate.—Cradle. A crate is an open CRAVEN case made of rods of wood wattled together. Lat. crates, wicker or hurdle work ; craticius, wattled, composed of lattice work. It. crate, a harrow, hurdle, grate ; graticcia, a hurdle, lattice. Dan. krat, copse ; krat-skov, copse-wood. Gael. creathach, underwood, brushwood ; creathall, AS. cradol, a cradle (from being made of wicker). Gael. creathall is also a grate. Ir. creatach, a hurdle of wattled rods. Walach. cratariu, clathri, cancelli, lattice.
Parallel with the foregoing are found a series of forms with similar meaning, with an initial cl instead of cr. Lat. clathri, lattice ; Ir. cliath, a harrow, wattled hurdle, the darning of a stocking mended crosswise like lattice work. Gael. cleath, wattled work, a harrow, hurdle, gate ; Fr. claye, a hurdle or lattice of twigs, a wattled gate ; Gael. cleathach, ribbed, cliathag, the chine or spine (G. rückgrat).
The origin of both series seems to be the word which appears under the forms of Gr. κλάδος, Manx clat, Gael. slat, W. llath, E. lath, properly a shoot, twig, rod. The Dan. krat-skov would then be a wood of shoots or rods, as opposed to timber of large growth.
Crater. Gr. κρατήρ, a goblet, the basin or hollow whence the smoke and lava issue on Mount Etna.
Cravat. Formerly written crabat, and spoken of by Skinner (who died in 1667) as a fashion lately introduced by travellers and soldiers. The fashion is said by Menage to have been brought in 1636 from the war, and to have been named from the Crabats or Cravats, as the Croatians (and after them a kind of light cavalry) were then called. The French had a regiment 'Le Royal-Cravate.' Pl.D. Krabaten, Kravaten, Croatians.
Crave. AS. crafian, to ask. ON. krefa, to demand, require ; krafi, need, necessity. W. cref, a cry, a scream ; crefu, to cry, to desire, to beg earnestly.—Spurrell.
Craven. Craven, cravant, a coward. Also anciently a term of disgrace, when the party that was overcome in a single combat yielded and cried cravant.—B. If the term had originally been craven, signifying one who had begged his life, it could hardly have passed into the more definite form cravant. The E. dial. cradant, Sc. crawdon, a coward, seem the same word. To set cradants is to propose feats for the purpose of seeing who will first give in.—Wilbr. Craddantly, cowardly.—Hal.

The essence of the cry was an admission that the party begging his life was overcome. In the combat between Gawain and Ywain, when they become known to each other, each tries to give the other the honour of victory. Sir King, he said, withowten fail I am overcumen in this batayl. Nay certes, said Gawain, bot am I. Thus nowther wald have the maistri; Before the King gan aither grant That himself was recreant,—v. 3710.

In another combat, when the defeated champion has begged his life : Sir Ywain said I grant it thee If that thou wil thi selven say That thou art overcomen this day. He said, I grant withouten fail I am overcumen in batail, For pur ataynt and recreant.—v. 3280.

This acknowledgment of being overcome was expressed by It. ricredere, and the beaten party was termed ricredente, Fr. recreant, a term of opprobrium exactly equivalent to the E. craven. Another word by which a combatant gave up his cause was Fr. creanter, also a derivation from Lat. credo, which was itself in Mid.Lat. used in the sense of grant or confess. See Grant.
Sire, dist il, tenez m'espée, La bataille avez affinée, Bien vos creant et reconnois Que clerc sont vaillant et cortois (the question in dispute)—Et ainsi m'espée vos rent. Fab. et Contes, iv. 364.

Hence E. creant in the sense of recreant or craven.
'Thai said, Syr knight, thou most nede Do the lioun out of this place—Or yelde the to us als creant. Ywaine and Gawaine, 3170.

See also P. P. xii. 193.

The d of E. cradant (changing to v in cravant, craven) and in Sc. crawdoun, a craven, seems to be the original d in Lat. credo. It. ricredente, which is elided in Fr. creanter (credentiare), recreant. It must be confessed that this want of agreement between the Fr. and E. forms throws considerable difficulty in the way of the proposed derivation, which I nevertheless believe to be the true one. In outward form cravant comes much nearer Prov. cravantar, OFr. craventer, to oppress, beat down, overthrow. Je suis tout cra-venté, accablé de fatigue.—Hécant. The cry of cravanté! then, would be an admission of being thoroughly beaten, but we find no traces of the expression having ever been so used in a judicial combat.

Craw. G. kragen, the neck, throat, and in vulgar language the belly, guts. Du. kraeye, jugulus, ingluvies, Ang. craeye.—Kil. Sw. krafwa, Dan. kro, a craw. See Crag.

Crawfish. Disguised by a false etymology, as if it were the designation of a certain kind of fish. The corruption however is comparatively modern. 'Creveys, fysshe—polypus.'—Pr. Pm. Written also crevish.—Trench. From the Fr. écre-visse, Du. krevisse, krevitse—Kil., OHG. krebiz, G. krebs, a crab, from the grabbing or clutching action of the animal. Sp. escarbar, to scrabble ; escarabajo, Lang. escarabat, a beetle (an animal in which the claw is nearly as conspicuous a feature as in the crab), escarabisse, a craw-fish.

* To Crawl. To stir, to move feebly and irregularly, to be in confused and multifarious movement like ants or maggots. 'I crawle, I styrre with my lymmes as a yonge chylde, or any beest that styrreth and can not move the body : je crosle. It is a strange sight to se a chycken how it cralleth first out of the shell :—comment il crosle premiérement hors de l'escale.'—Palsgr. To crawl, to abound.—Hal.

The radical image is a multitudinous, confused sound, the expression of which is applied to movement of similar character, to indistinct multifarious motion, to a mass of moving things. The It. gorgogliare signifies in the first instance to gurgle or sound like water in violent agitation, to rattle in the throat or quaver in singing, and then (explaining the origin of Lat. curculio) 'to breed or become vermine, wormlets or such creepers, mites or weevils as breed in pulse or corn.'—Fl. Fr. grougouler, to rumble or croak like the guts ; grouller, grouiller, to rumble, to move, stir, scrall, to swarm, abound, break forth confusedly in great numbers.—Cot. Illyrian kruleti, to rumble in the bowels. Fr. croller, to murmur.—Roquef. E. crawl, croll, crool, to rumble, mutter. My guts they yawl, crawl, and all my belly nimbleth.—Gammer Gurton, ii. a.

Then, as in previous instances, to crawl, to stir. In the same way we pass from Du. schrollen, to mutter, grumble, to E. scrall, to swarm or abound ; from Pl.D. graal, a confused noise, grolen, to vociferate, Icel. gryla, to grumble, to Dan. gryle, Du. grielen, krielen, to crall or swarm, to stir about.

Crayon. Fr. crayon, a piece of drawing chalk, from craier, to chalk; craie, Lat. creta, chalk, Gael. creadh, clay.
To Craze. — Crazy. To craze, to crack, to render inefficient.
And some said the pot was crazed. Can. Yeoman's Tale.
Earthenware at the present day is said to be crazed when the glaze is disfigured with a network of small cracks. Fr. accrazer, to break, burst, craze, bruise, crush; escrasé, squasht down, crushed in pieces.—Cot. From a representation of the noise of crashing a hard substance.
Dan. krase, knase, to crackle; slaae i kras, to break to pieces. Sw. kraslig, Swiss chrachelig, crazy, feeble, decrepit, poorly. The E. crazy, applied to the mind, is equivalent to cracked, cracky, crack-brained.

Creak. Imitative of a more acute sound than that represented by crack.
Fr. criquer, to creak, rattle, crackle; cricaille, chinks, coin. — Cot. It. criccare, cricchiare, to crick, creak, or squeak, as a door or a cartwheel, also to rattle.
Cricco, cricchio, that creaking noise of ice or glass when it breaks. Du. krick, krack, strepitus, fragor.—Kil. Then, as things in splitting make a sharp sound, we have creak of day for the narrow crack of light on the horizon, which is the first appearance of dawn. Du. kriecke, krieckelinge, Aurora rutilans, primum diluculum.—Kil.

Cream. In Fr. crème two words seem confounded, the one signifying cream, which ought to be written without the circumflex, and the other signifying chrism, OFr. cresme, Gr. χρίσμα, the consecrated oil used in baptism. In Italian the two are kept distinct, crema, cream, and cresima, chrism. The primary meaning of the word is, I believe, simmering, and thence foam, froth.
Crème—spuma lactis pinguior.—Dict. Trev. Champagne crémant, sparkling or mantling champagne. ON. at krauma, lente coqui, to simmer; kraumr, krumr, kraum, the lowest stage of boiling, simmering, also the juice or cream of a thing, cremor, flos rei. It. cremore, the creeming or simpering of milk when it beginnith to seethe; also yeast, barm; used also for a shivering fever.—Fl. It must be remembered that one of the readiest ways of raising cream is by scalding the milk till it just begins to simmer. The forms cremore and crema in Italian correspond to the ON. kraumr, kraum. Grisons gromma, gramma, cream, sgarmar, sgarmer, sgramer, to skim the milk. As is often the case with words beginning with cr, the equivalents of the E. cream are accompanied by a parallel series beginning with a simple r. AS. and Sc. ream, ON. riomi, Du. room, G. rahm, cream.
—Or quaff pure element, ah me! Without ream, sugar, or bohea.—Ramsay in Jam.
Reaming liquor, frothing liquor.

-crease.—Increase.—Decrease. Lat. cresco, cretum, Fr. croistre, croitre (croissons, croissois, croissant), to grow.

Crease. Bret. kris, a wrinkle, pleat, tuck in a garment. The designation of a wrinkle seems often taken from a representation of the sound of snarling, as a dog in snarling wrinkles up the face.
Du. grijsen, grijnsen, ringere, os distorquere, depravare, nares crispare, fremere, frendere, flere puerorum more—Kil.; grijnzen, montrer son chagrin en se ridant le front, en fronçant le sourcil, en gringant les dents, ou par d'autres grimaces.—Halma.
Fr. grisser, to crackle, crisser, grincer les dents, to grind, grate, or gnash the teeth together for anger.—Cot.
It. gricciare, to chill or chatter with the teeth; grinciare, grinzare, to grin or gnash with the teeth, to wrinkle; grincia, grinza, a wrinkle.
From It. grinza we readily pass to G. runzel, a wrinkle, analogous to E. crumple and rumple.
We see the same relation between grinning or snarling and wrinkling in Du. grimmen, furere, fremere, frendere, hirrire, ringere, ducere vultus, contrahere rugas—Kil.; It. grimaccie, grimazze, crabbed looks, wry mouths; grimare, grimmare, to wrinkle through age; grimo, grimmo, wrinkled, withered.
Grignare, to grin or snarl as a dog.—Fl. Fr. grigner, to grin; grigne, wrinkled.—Cot.

Create. — Creature. Lat. creo, to beget, give birth to, give rise to, produce.

Creed. — Credit. — Credential. — Credulous. Lat. credo, to believe, trust.
Mid. Lat. credentia. It. credenza, trust, confidence, also a pledge of trust and credence, thence the essay or taste of a prince's meat and drink which was taken by the proper officer before it was set on the table. The term was then applied to the sideboard on which the dishes were placed before they were set on the table, whence the credence-table of our churches on which the elements were placed preparatory to being used in the sacrament.

Creek. I. Fr. crique, Du. kreek, a little bay, a nook in a harbour; Sw. dial. krik, a bending, nook, corner, little inlet of the sea; armkrik, bending of the arm, elbow ; ON. kryki, crook, nook. Crick, like click or knick, probably represents in the first instance a sharp sudden sound, and is then transferred to a sudden turn or movement. Comp. nick, a notch, a slight indenture.

2. Creek in America is the common word for a brook. Cryke of water, scatera.—Pr. Pm. Du. kreke (Kil.), AS. crecca, crepido, a bank.

To Creep. AS. creopan, Du. kruipen, G. kriechen. The radical sense is to crouch or draw oneself together, to cringe, to move in a crouching attitude or, like a serpent, by contractions of the body. ON. krjupa (kryp, kropit), to creep, to bend the knees, to crouch ; k. undir skriptina, to bow under reproof; báthir fjetr váru upp kropnir, both feet were crooked up. Kropna, to contract ; kryppa, a hump. Gael. crup, crouch, bend, contract, shrink; crùb, sit, squat, crouch ; crùban, a crouching attitude ; crùbain, creep, crouch, cringe, shrug. See Cramp.

Creole. A native of the Spanish American colonies, or of the W. Indies, of European descent. Sp. criar, to create, to breed ; criollo, a Creole ; Ptg. crioulo, a slave born in his master's house, a European born in America.

Creosote. Gr. κρέας, flesh, and σωτήρ, preservative.

Crescent. The figure of the growing moon, of the moon in an early stage of growth. Fr. croissant, Lat. crescens, growing.

Cress. An herb eaten raw. AS. cærse, Du. kersse, Sw. krasse. Fr. cresson, the herb termed kars or cresses ; cresson d'eau, water karses.—Cot. It. crescione, cressone. Mid.Lat. crissonium. Perhaps from the crunching sound of eating the crisp green herb. Fr. crisser, to grind the teeth.

Cresset. See Crock.

Crest. Lat. crista, Fr. creste, crête.

-Crete. Lat. cresco, cretum, to grow ; concresco, to grow together, to grow into a whole, whence concrete in logic applied to the union of an attribute with its subject. Thence by the opposition of words compounded with con and dis, discrete, separate, distinct, disjunctive.

Crevice. Fr. crevasse, crevure, a chink, rift, from crever, to burst, chink, rive, or chawne.—Cot. Lat. crepare, to creak, crack, break.

Crew. AS. cread, a company, crew ; cread-cnearr, a ship with its crew. Lith. kruwa, a heap, as of stones or of people.

Crewel. Two-twisted worsted.—B. Properly a ball of worsted. G. knäuel, Pl.D. klevel, a ball of thread. The interchange of liquids in this class of words is very common. Compare W. clob, crob, E. knob, a round lump or hunch.

Crib. A cratch or manger for cattle. Du. kribbe, G. krippe, Pl.D. krubbe. It. greppia, gruppia, Prov. crepia, crepcha, Fr. creiche. The proper meaning of the word seems to be a grating, a receptacle made of rods or parallel bars like the teeth of a comb or rake, from W. crib, a comb, cribin, a rake. G. krippe signifies also a hurdle or wattle, wattlework of stakes and rods to strengthen the bank of a river. On the same principle G. raufe is a ripple or large comb for plucking off the seeds of flax, as well as a crib or rack for hay. Bret. rastel, a hay-rack, is Lat. rastellum, a rake, and the word rack itself is radically identical with rake.

Crick. Crykke, sekeness, crampe, spasmus, tetanus.—Pr. Pm. From representing a short sharp sound the term seems transferred to a sharp sudden pain, as a crick in the neck.

Cricket, 1. An insect making a sharp creaking sound. Du. krieken, to chirp, kriek, a cricket.—Halma. Compare also Bohem. cwrcek, a cricket, cwrkati, to chirp; Fr. grillon, grezillon, a cricket, and griller, to creak, greziller, to crackle.—Cot.
2. A stool. N. knakk, krakk, Pl.D. krukstool, a three-legged stool.
* 3. Fr. jeu de crosse, the game of cricket. Croce or crosse is explained by Cot. the crooked staff wherewith boys play at cricket. It was doubtless originally a stick with a crook at the end for striking the ball, like that used in the game of hockey. Fr. croce is the equivalent of E. crook, of which probably cricket is a derivative. Du. krick,' a staff or crutch.—Kil.

Crime. Gr. κρίνω, to judge, κρίμα, judgment, condemnation, Lat. crimen, a fault, offence.

Crimini. O Crimini ! interjection of surprise, seems to have come to us from an Italian source. Mod.Gr. κρίμα, a crime, fault, sin, pity, misfortune. Ὦ τί κρίμα ! Ὦ τί μεγάλου κρίμα ! O what a pity ! what a sin or fault ! Adopted into Italian the expression would be O che crimine ! It seems probable indeed that the E. pity, in the exclamation what a pity, is a direct adoption of the OFr. pechi, sin, used exactly as It. crimine.

Dex quel pechié, quand od s'espée A la meschine decollée.—Rom. de Rou. i. 288.
Crimp.—Crimple. Cramp, crimp, crump are all used in the sense of contraction. To crimp frills is to lay them in pleats; crimped cod is cod in which the fibre has been allowed to contract by means of parallel cuts through the muscle of the fish. To crimple is to wrinkle; crympylle or rympyllc, ruga.—Pr. Pm. See Cramp.
The addition of an initial s gives E. scrimp, to contract, cut short, AS. scrim-man, to dry up, wither, G. schrumpfen, to crumple, shrivel, wrinkle. On the other hand, the reduction of the initial cr to a simple r gives E. rimple as well as rumple, a wrinkle, crease, pucker; Du. rimpe, rimpel, rompel, a wrinkle.—Kil. G. rümpfen, to screw up the mouth and nose, make wry faces. In the latter sense Kil. has krimpneusen, wrimpen, wrempen, os distorquere, corrugare nares. The analogous E. term is frump, to frizzle up the nose as in derision.—B., whence frumple, a wrinkle.—Pr. Pm.
Crimp. 2. A kidnapper of sailors, one who entraps sailors and keeps them like fish in a stew till he can dispose of them to skippers. Du. krimpe, a stew or confined place where fish are kept till they are wanted; from krimpen, to contract.
Crimson. Fr. cramoisi. It. cremasi, cremesino. Turk. kirmizi; Sp. carmesi, from kermes, the name of the insect with which it is dyed. Sanscr. krimi, a worm. Comp. vermilion from vermis.
To Cringe. To go bowing, behave in a submissive manner: From AS. crumb, crymbig, crooked, a verb crymbigean, crymbian (not in the dictionaries) would be to crook or bend, corresponding to E. cringe, as It. cambiare to E. change. G. krumm, crooked; sich krümmen und bücken, to stoop and cringe.—Kütn. Dan. krybe, to creep, grovel, krybe for een, to cringe to one.
Crinkle. See Crank.
Cripple. Properly a crookback or humpback, one who goes crooked. ON. kryppa, a hump, curvature, coil; kryp-pill, a humpbacked or a lame man. Du. krepel, kreupel, kropel, a cripple. Dan. krybe, krob, to creep, kröbbel, kröbling, a cripple, a stunted object; Gael. crub, crup, to crouch, shrink, creep (go in a crooked or crouching manner), crubach, crupach, a cripple, lame person.
Crisis.—Criterion.—Critic. Gr. κρίσις, judgment or the decision in a legal trial, from κρίνω, to judge, decide; κριτήριον, a means or medium of judging; κριτικός, qualified or expert in judging, Lat. cri-ticus. See Crime.
Crisp. Lat. crispus, Fr. crespe, OE. crips, curled.
Her hair that owndie (wavy) was and crips.
Chaucer in R.
The latter form might lead us to connect the word with Gael. crup, contract, cru-pag, a wrinkle. On the other hand, the AS. cirpsian, to crisp or curl, compared with E. chirp, reminds us that Fr. cresper is both to frizzle or curl, and to crackle or creak, as new shoes or dry sticks laid on the fire.—Cot. And the sense of a curly or wrinkled structure is in other cases expressed by words representing in the first instance a crackling or creaking sound. It. grillare (and sometimes Fr. griller—Cot.) signifies to creak or chirp as a cricket, while griller is explained to sit rumpled or in plaits, to snarl as over-twisted thread; greziller, to crackle, also to curl, twirl, frizzle hair. To frizzle is used both of the crackling sound of fat in the fire, and in the sense of curling up. The train of thought proceeds from a quivering sound to a vibratory motion, and thence to a surface thrown into a succession of ridges or involutions. Thus the Latin has sonus lusciniae vibrans for the ring-ing notes of the nightingale, while the passage from the idea of vibration to that of a wrinkled or curly structure may be illustrated by the designation of a chitter-ling and the synonymous shirt-frill, from E. chitter, and Fr. friller, to shiver. Vibrati crines are curly locks, and con-versely crispus is applied to the rapid vibration of a serpent's tongue. Linguae bisulcae jactu crispo fulgere.—Pacuv. in Forcell.
The sense of rigid and brittle might well be a special application of the former one, because the unevennesses of a rigid surface obtrude themselves on our notice. But on the other hand it seems to arise from direct imitation of the sound of crushing something crisp. Fr. cresper, to crashe as a thynge dothe that is cryspe or britell betweene one's teeth.—Palsgr. Pl.D. kraspeln, to rustle.—Danneil. In like manner crump is used for the sound of crunching, and also for crisp or the quality of things that crunch between the teeth.
Tib's teeth the sugar-plums did crump.— Farls baked wi' butter Fu' crump that day.—Burns in Jam.

Crumpy, short, brittle.—Hal. It is remarkable that here also is the same connection with the sense of a crumpled or curly and wrinkled structure, as in the case of crisp.

Crock.—Cruise.—Cruet.—Cresset.—Crucible. Lith. kragis, Gael. krog, G. krug, W. cregen, E. crock, Dan. krukke, Du. kruycke, an earthen vessel, pitcher, jar. The Lith. kruzas (z = Fr. j), Fr. cruche, unite the foregoing with forms having a final s; ON. & G. krus, Du. kroes, kruyse, a cup, E. cruse, a jar. Diminutives of the latter class are Fr. creuset, croiset, a crucible, cruzet or cruet, a little earthen pot wherein Goldsmiths melt their silver, &c.—Cot.; Rouchi crassé, creissé, E. cresset, a hanging lamp. Mid. Lat. crassetum, Picard cracet, a crucible.—Dief. Supp. The loss of the z in cruzet gives cruet, corrupted to crewet, crevet, a narrow-mouthed glass to hold oil or vinegar, a melting-pot.—B.

Other forms of diminutive are Fr. creuseul, croissel, Du. kruysel, krosel, a hanging lamp; Ir. cruisgin, a small pot or pitcher (cruisgin oli, Lith. alywkragis, G. olkrug, a cruse of oil); Gael. cruisgin, an oil-lamp, a cruse; Fr. creusequin, a drinking-vessel; E. cruskin, cruske, cup of earth.—Pr. Pm. The Gr. dim. termination κρουλο gives crucibolum, a night-lamp, melting-pot. 'Creuseul, croissol, lumiere de nuit'—Gloss. in Duc. 'De noctu proferenti saepius extinguebat candelam, crucibolum, et oleum effundebat.'—Ibid. 'Crucibolus, kruse, kruselin, krug, becher.'—Dief. Supp.

The common idea is an earthen vessel, and the origin is seen in Bret. krag, hard granular stone, earthenware; Eur pôd krag, an earthen pot. The Bret. krag corresponds to Fr. grais, gres, grès. Un pot de grès, an earthen pot. Hence OFr. grasal, Lang. grazal, grezal. Cat. gresal, an earthen bowl or dish, gresol, an earthen lamp, a crucible. N. grjot, stone; gryte, a pot.

In favour of the correspondence of krag and grès (graz), it must be observed that a final z in one dialect of Breton corresponds to a guttural c'h in the other, as in kraz or krac'h, dry. And compare Bret. gragala, to chatter as a jay, and Prov. grazillar, to crackle, twitter. If krag and grès are fundamentally distinct there must be the same separation between the series crag, krug, &c., and cruse, &c. See Grail.

Crocodile. Gr. κροκόδειλος, Lat. crocodilus.

Crocus. The yellow flower from whence saffron is made. Lat. crocus, Gr. κρόκος. Gael. croch, W. coch, red. Hence the surname Croker, a cultivator of saffron. 'The crokers or saffron men do use an observation a little before the coming up of the flower.'—Hollinshed in R.

Croft. An inclosure adjoining a house. AS. croft, prædiolum.—Somner. Gael. croit, a hump, hunch, a croft or small piece of arable land; croiteir, a crofter, one holding a croft of land.

Crone. 1. An old woman. 2. An old sheep, beginning to lose its teeth. * In the former application it may perhaps signify one shrunk from age. Sc. crine, to shrink, shrivel; one who is shrivelled by age is said to be crynit in.—Jam. Comp. NE. scranny, thin; scrannel, a lean person. In the second application it is the It. carogna, Fr. charogne, Du. karonie, kronie, a carcase, carrion, then applied to an old sheep, ovis vetula rejicula—Kil., ein faul Thier—Dief. Supp., a cadaver. Perhaps indeed the application to an old woman has the same origin. 'An old carrion.'

Crook.—Crooked. ON. krókr, Du. krog, a crook, bending, corner, hook; Du. kroke, a bending, fold, curl, crumple, wrinkle (Kil.); Gael. crocan, a hook, crook; W. crwca, croca, crooked; Fr. croc, crochet, a hook; crochu, hooked, bent upon itself; Pol. kruk, a hook, crook. We have seen under Crisp several instances where a broken, crumpled, wrinkled, curly form is expressed by the figure of a broken sound. And in this way I believe it is that we pass from forms like Bret. gragala, to chatter like a jay, or E. crackle, to Fr. recroquiller, to crook, wriggle, pucker, cockle, and Du. kreukelen, kreuken, kroken, to rumple, crumple, wrinkle, of which the radical syllable kreuk or crok conveys the notion of something bent or hooked. See Crank.

Crop. AS. crop, top, bunch, craw of a bird. OE. croppe of an erbe or tree, cima, coma, capillamentum.—Pr. Pm. The fundamental meaning is probably exhibited in the Gael. crap, cnap, a knob, knot, boss, a little hill; W. crob, crwb, a round hunch; crub, a swelling out; It. groppo, a knot, knob, bunch.—Fl. The word is then applied to different things of a rounded or protuberant form, the top of a hill or of a plant, the crop or projecting stomach of a bird, &c. Fr. crope, croupe, the top or knap of a hill; la croupe du dos, the ridge of the back, and thence croupe. It. groppa, the rump or rounded haunches of an animal; E. croup, the craw, the belly, also the buttock or haunch—Hal. ; Sw. kropp, the top of anything, the solid mass of the animal frame or body; kroppug, gibbous, humped. Du. crop, the knob of the throat, the throat itself, ' dat steeckt my in den crop; that sticks in my throat; crop, a swelling in the throat, goitre, the craw of a bird, stomach; croppen, to cram, to thrust food into the throat (Bi-glotton), whence the E. crop-full, cram-full. G. kropf, the craw of a bird, goitre, wen; the head of vegetables, as kohl-kropf, salat-kropf; kropfsallat, Du. krop van salaet, cabbage-lettuce.

The crop of a vegetable is the top, and thence the whole part above ground. The crop and root, or crop and more, are frequently contrasted with each other in OE. Hence to crop is to bite or gather the foliage or fruit. A crop of corn is the whole annual growth, and the sense being thus generalised the term is equally applied to the growth of roots, when that is the important part of the vegetables; a crop of turnips or of carrots as well as of grass or fruit.

It is remarkable that parallel with many of the foregoing forms, with an initial kr, are a series of similar meaning with a simple k. Thus we have in E. the crop or cop of a hill; Bav. koppen, the crop or bushy part of a tree, koppen, to crop or cut off the crop or cop of a tree; G. kohl-kopf, kopf-sallat as kropf-sallat above cited.

Crosier. It. croccia, a crutch; Fr. croce, crosse, a bishop's staff (the representative of a shepherd's crook), the crooked staff with which boys play at cricket. Hence OE. crocer or crosier was properly the bearer of the bishop's staff, but the term was subsequently applied to the staff itself. See Crook, Crutch. Hollinshed speaks of the canon law as admitting the crosier to bear the crosse before his archbishop in another province.—Descr. Ireland, an. 1311.

Cross. Fr. croix, It. croce, Sp. kruz, ON. kross, G. kreuz, Du. kruys. All from the Lat. crux, a cross for the punishment of malefactors; and that not directly from crook, to curve, but through the intermediation of the notion of hanging; Gael. crocan, a hook, crock, hang; Ir. crochaim, to hang, and crock, as Lat. crux, a gallows, an erection for hanging a man on. From crux are many derivatives : cruciare, to torture; crusade, Mid.Lat. cruciata, Du. kruys-vaert, an expedition from religious motives, in which the soldiers took the badge of the cross; crucify, &c.

Crotchet. — Crocket. Fr. crochet, dim. of croc, a little hook, and hence a note in music, from the hook-like symbol by which they were marked. Fr. crochet, crochue, a quaver in music. Then as a person playing music appears to carry in his brain the type of what he is playing, a crotchet is a fixed imagination. ' Il a des crochues dans la tete, his head is full of crotches.'—Cot.

As a good harper stricken far in years Into whose cunning hands the gout does fall, All his old crotchets in his brain he bears, But on his harp plays ill or not at all.
Davies in R.

A crotchet or crocket is also an ornamental excrescence in Gothic architecture like a twisted tress of hair, from Du. kroke, a curl.

And bellyche ycorven With crotchets on corners.—P. P. crede.

Crottles. Crottles, cruttles, crumbs, broken pieces—Brocket; crottling, friable ; crottles, Fr. crottes, crottins, the dung of sheep, goats, hares, &c., that falls in pellets or little lumps; crottes, dirt, mire, dagling stuff (Cot.) ; Flanders krotte, mud sticking to one's clothes.—Kil. E. krote, a clod of earth.—Hal.

The analogy between sound and movement frequently leads to the application of a rattling sound to express jolting or shaking movement, and thence an uneven rugged surface, the prominences into which it is thrown, or the lumps which are dashed off when the substance is of a liquid or semi-liquid nature.

We have Gr. κροτέω, to clap, rattle, clatter, knock, hammer; κρόταλον, a rattle ; κρότος, clapping, rattling; Prov. crotlar, OFr. crodler, croler, to shake; escrouler, to shake, totter, shog (Cot.) ; crouler, s'écrouler, to fall in ruins, E. crudle, to shudder, shake, shiver; crudly, cruttling, crumbling, friable; cruttle, to fall.—Hal. The form cruddle, to coagulate or form lumps, and crud, curd, the lumpy part of milk, belong to the same class. Cruttle, to curdle.—Hal.

Sometimes perhaps the sense of lumps or bits may arise directly from the pattering sound of the fragments falling to the ground, and this may be the case with crottles, the pellet-shaped dung of sheep, &c., which are also called trattles or treadles, to be compared with Banff. truttle, to trickle or drip; E. trattle (properly to rattle), to prattle.—Hal. But sometimes the sense of fragments seems to arise from the idea of shaking or dashing to pieces, as when we use shivers or shiders in that sense. When the substance is of a loose or liquid nature it is the more liable to have portions dashed off by shaking or jogging. Thus Swiss hottern, to shake, to jog, explains Du. hot, hotte, curds; Sc. hattit cream, clotted cream. In like manner Swab. loppern, Westerwald lappern, to be loose, to wabble, are connected with E. loppered or coagulated milk, and Fr. loppe, lopin, a lump, morsel, piece. The elementary sounds of crottle are merely transposed in E. clotter, to coagulate; Du. klotermelck, curdled milk, from the verb kloteren (properly to clatter; kloterspaen, a rattle), tuditare, pultare, pulsare crebro ictu.—Kil. Here the connection between kloteren and klot, klotte, gleba, massa (Kil.), E. clod, clot, is the same as between Gr. κροτέω and E. crottle, a clod, Fr. crotte, a lump of dirt. The semi-liquid material seems conceived as dashed about in separate portions, explaining Du. klotergeld, small expenses.—Kil. In the same way with a labial initial instead of a guttural, G. poltern, to rattle, racket, knock; E. blotter, to clotter, to collect in lumps; Sw. plottra (properly to dash about liquids), to scatter in small portions, to squander; plotterwis, in small portions; platter-penningar, small expenses; Fr. bloutre, Gael. plad, a clod.

Crouch. A cross, as in crutched friars, the crossed friars, or friars who wore a cross; crouch-mass, a festival in honour of the holy cross. To crouch, to mark with the sign of the cross. And said his orisons as is usage, And crouchid hem and bade God shuld hem bless. Walach. crouche, a cross.

To Crouch. To stoop, to bow the body together. ON. krokinn, crooked, bowed down, krokna, to be contracted or stiffened with cold; at sitia i eina kruku, to crouch down on one's heels, W. crwcau, to bow, to curve; crwcwd, a round squat, a person crouched together. E. dial. cruckle, to bend, to stoop.—Hal. See Crook.

Croup. A disease in the throat of young children, in which the throat is contracted and a harsh screaming cough produced. Gael. crup, contract, shrink; crupadh, contraction, shrinking, shrivelling; the croup. But perhaps the idea of contraction, expressed by the syllable crup, is derived from the harsh sound of struggling for breath through a contracted windpipe, and not vice versâ, so that the name of the disease would be direct from an imitation of the sound produced. Sc. roup, hoarseness, the croup; to roup (Goth. hropjan, ON. hropa), to cry; E. dial. to croup, to croak.—Hal. Bohem. chrapati, chrupati, to snort; chrapawy, hoarse, chropot, snorting, hoarseness, chroptiti (röcheln), to struggle for breath, to sob.

Croup.—Crupper. Croup, belly, craw, haunch, ridge of the back.—Hal. Fr. crape, croupe, the top of a hill, rump of an animal. La croupe du dos, the ridge of the back; porter en croupe, to carry behind one on horseback. Hence croupière, the crupper or strap passing over the rump of the horse. See Crop.

Crow.—Crouk. A direct imitation of the cry of different birds. G. krähen, to crow like a cock; krächzen, to croak; Du. kraeyen, to crow or to croak or caw; Lat. crocire, It. crocciolare, Fr. croasser, Gr. Κρώζω, Bohem. krokati, to croak. Piedm. quaqua, Ital. cracra, imitation of the cawing of rooks or crows.—Zalli. From Du. kraeyen is formed kraeye, a crow. In like manner the ON. has krakr, a raven, kraki, a crow, corresponding to E. croak; Lith. kraukti, to croak, krauklys, NE. crouk, a crow.

Crowd.—Crowder. The crowd or fiddle was recognised by the Romans as a British instrument. Romanusque lyrâ plaudat tibi, Barbarus harpâ, Græcus Achilliaci; crotta Britanna placet. Fortunatus in Duc. Named from the hollow sounding-board, W. crwth, a hollow protuberance, bulge, belly, fiddle; croth, a bulge, a womb, crothi, to bulge. Gael. croit, a hump, cruit, a harp, fiddle; Ir. cruit, a hunch, also a crowd or fiddle.

Crowd. 2. AS. cruth, a crowd or press of people. Du. kruyden, kruyen, trudere, protrudere, propellere.—Kil. Crowdyn or showyn (shove) impello.—Pr. Pm. To crowd is still used in Suffolk in the sense of driving in a crowd-barrow or wheel-barrow (Du. kruy-wagen).—Forby. In Amis and Amilown a crowd-wain. Then Amoraunt crud Sir Amiloun Through many a cuntre up and down.—Way. Perhaps the radical image may be a ball or lump, from whence the notion of pressing may be derived. Pol. gruda. Boh. hruda, a clod, snowball; hruden, the intercalary month, the month that is thrust in.
Crown. Lat. corona, W. crwn, round, circular; crynfaen, a pebble, a round stone; crynoi, to collect together, to draw to a mass, crynyn, a globule; Ir. cruin, round, cruinne, the globe of the earth; cruinnighim, to collect; Gael. crùn, the boss of a shield, a crown, garland; cruinn, round, globular; cruinne, the globe, cruinneachan, any round heap.
Crucial. Applied to a trial of the utmost rigour; a met. from the torture of the cross.
Crucible. See Crock.
Crucify. Lat. crucifigere, to fix to the cross.
Crude.—Cruel. Lat. crudus, bloody, raw, unripe, unfeeling; crudelis, hard, cruel, severe; cruentus, bloody, cruel; cruor, blood. Russ. krov', Bohem. krew, W. crau, Ir. cru, Lith. kraujas, blood. Bret. kriz, raw, cruel.
Cruet. See Crock.
Cruise. To sail to and fro. Du. kruissen, from kruis; Fr. croiser, from croix; Dan. krydse, from kryds, a cross.
Crum.—Crumble. G. krume, Du. kruime, crum; kruimelen, Pl.D. krömen, krömelen, to crumble. Central Fr. gremiller, to crumble; gremille, gremillon, groumillon, crum, little lump; grume, grime, single grain of a bunch. Fr. grumeau, a clot, lump.
It is probable that the notion of a crum or small bit arises from that of crumbling away, and not vice versâ, although the former word is the more simple in form. The idea of falling to pieces is easily expressed by a representation of the rattling sound of the falling fragments. Thus Sw. ramla, to rattle, signifies also, as E. rammel, to fall in ruins, to moulder in pieces; while Sw. rammel, rattle, clatter, is identical with E. rammel, rubble, rubbish. In the same way it is probable that Fr. gremiller and E. crumble are essentially the same with grommeler, to mutter or grumble. So also we pass through Yv. greziller, to crackle, gresiller, to hail, to drizzle, G. grieseln, to fall into small bits and pieces, to break into small pieces, to gries, chips of stone, gravel, grains, Lesachthal griesel, a morsel, a grain of sand.—D. M. ii. 348. See Dredge.
Crump. Crump-back, hump-back; crump or crumple-footed, club-footed; Sw. krumpen, shrunk, contracted, numbed. AS. crumb, crump, crymbig, bowed, bent; G. krumm, W. cròn, crwm, crooked, crymu, to bend, crook, stoop; Sc. crummy, a cow with a crumpled horn. The fundamental image, in accordance with the views explained under Cramp, should be a lump, round mass, or projection, from whence the ideas of contraction, bending, crookedness, readily follow. Now in the former sense we have W. crwb, a hump, E. croop-back, a hump-back, and with the nasal, crump, the projection of the haunches, rump.—Hal.
Crumpet. Bret. krampoez (2 syll.), W. crammwyth, a pancake.
Crumple. It is shown under Rumple that the representation of a rumbling sound is used to express, first a jolting or irregular movement, then a disturbed, disordered surface, thrown into irregularities and projections. It is probable that the same development of signification has taken place in the case of crumple, proceeding from a form like that assumed as the origin of crumble, which would not essentially differ from G. grammeln, grommeln, grummeln, or E. grumble. To rumble and grumble are used indifferently in many cases, as for the sound of thunder or of wind in the bowels, while the two corresponding forms, rumple and crumple, arising from the use of spirants instead of sonants, are applied to the disturbance of a surface or texture. Analogous to crumple, as compared with rumple, or grumble with rumble, stands Lett. grubbali, broken fragments of walls, as compared with E. rubble, rubbish. Lett. grunibt, to wrinkle, crumple.
To Crunk or Crunkle. To cry like a crane or heron. Lith. krankti, to make a harsh noise, to snort, croak; krunkinti, krankinti, to croak.
Crupper. See Croup.
To Crush. From a representation of the noise of crushing a hard or brittle body. Fr. croissir, to crack or crash or crackle as wood that is ready to break.— Cot. It. crosciare, croscere, to squash, crash, crush, squeeze, but properly to fall violently as a sudden storm of rain or hail upon the tiles, and therewithal to make a clattering loud noise; to crick as green wood; croscio d'acque, a sudden shower.— Fl. Lith. kruszti, to crush, to grind; krusza, hail, sleet; kruszatinne (graupe), meal, grots; nukruszti, to grind off the husks of corn, especially barley (It. cricsca, bran?). Hanover. krösseln, to crush, break to bits.
Crust. Lat. crusta, the hard outward coat of anything. In all probability from the sound of crunching a crust of

CRUTCHbread. Bohem. chraustati, to crunch; chrasta, the crust of a wound; chrastel, the corncrake; chraust, a beetle, insect with a crusty covering; chrustacka, gristle. See Gristle. Bret., with an inversion of the consonants, trousken, crust of a wound, scab; rusk, bark; Gael. rusg, rind, skin, husk, bark; E. rusk, a hard crust, crust baked crisp.
Crutch. G. Krücke, Du. kruch, Lith. kruke, It. croccia, gruccia, a crutch, i. e. a staff with a crook or cross-bar at the top to rest the arm on.
To Cry. Imitative of a shrill sudden exertion of the voice. It. gridare, Fr. crier, G. schreien. Du. schrey, clamor et fletus, ejulatus. As a shrill cry is the natural expression of a high degree of pain, the word passes on to signify the shedding of tears, the most general expression of pain of any kind. In like manner the verb to weep comes from AS. wop, the primary meaning of which is simply outcry.
Crypt. It. cripta, a hollow vault, a church under-ground, a lurking den or secret sink under-ground.—Fl. Doubtless from κρύπτω, to hide, being primarily used for performing in safety the religious services of the early Christians. ' Ac per cryptas et latibula cum paucis Christianis per eum conversis mysterium solennitatis diei dominici clanculo celebrabat.'—Greg. of Tours in Duc. 'In qua Basilica est crypta abditissima.'—Ibid.
Crystal. Gr. κρύος, cold, frost; κρύσταλλος, ice, and thence crystal.
Cub. The young of animals of certain kinds, as of dogs, bears, foxes. Du. kabbe, kebbe, kebbeken, a little pig; kabbe-len, to produce young.
Cube. Gr. κύβος, Lat. cubus.
Cubit. Lat. cubitus, cubitum, the elbow or bending of the arm. From a root cub, signifying crook or bend, seen in Gael. cub, crouch, stoop, shrink, cubach, bent, hollowed, in Gr. κύπτω, to stoop, Lat. cubare, to lie down, properly, to bow down. Lith. kumpas, crooked.
Cucking-stool. A chair on which females for certain offences were fastened and ducked in a pond. ' The chair was sometimes in the form of a close-stool [which] contributed to increase the degradation.'—Hal. Manx cugh, excrement in children's language. ON. kuka, cacare. ' Similiter malam cervisiam faciens, aut in cathedra ponebatur stercoris, aut iiij. sol. dabat præpositis.'—Domesday B. in Way. The name is probably taken from the CUDDLE crouching attitude of a person at stool, and ultimately from the clucking of a brooding hen. The term for squatting or crouching is connected with the clucking of a hen in languages widely separated from each other. It. chiocco, a brood or cluck-hen, by met. squatting or cowering down; cocco, cucco (in nursery language), an egg; coccolare, to cluck; accoccolare, to cower; coccolone, squattingly on the ground, as women on their heels.—Fl. Magy. gugg, an egg (Dankovsky), also crouching or cowering down; Basque kukoratz, crowing of a cock; kukorika, to cower, crouch. Magy. kukorék, the crowing of a cock; kukoritni, to crow; kukorogni, to cower down. And probably W. cwrc, squatting, may belong to the same class of words.
Cuckold. Cuckolled, treated in the way that the cuckoo (Lat. cuculus) serves other birds, viz. by laying an egg in their nest.
Cuckow. G. kuckuck, Lat. cuculus, Sc. gowk, Du. kuyckkuck, kock-kock.—Kil. From the cry.
Cucumber. Fr. concombre, coucombre.—Cot. Lat. cucumis, -meris, a cucumber; It. cocomero.
Cud.—Quid. AS. cud, rumen (the stomach).—Somner. To chew the cud is to chew the contents of the stomach, which in ruminating animals are thrown up into the mouth again for that purpose. It is called quid in Surrey, whence a quid of tobacco is a small piece of tobacco kept in the mouth like the cud of a ruminating cow. Goth. qvithei, the womb; ON. qviðr, the womb, paunch, maw; at missa qviðinn, Dan. miste maven, in Surrey to lose the quid, a disease in cattle equivalent to Bailey's cudlost. In like manner in Lat. rumino, to chew cud, from rumen, the paunch. ' Ego rumorem parvifacio dum sit quid impleam,' so long as I am able to fill my belly. ON. at qviða, to fill one's belly, qviðaðr, satisfied, full. Fin. kohtu, the womb, maw, especially of ruminating animals; Esthon. kõht, the belly. Sc. kytc, the stomach, belly.
* To Cuddle. To fondle, to lie close together. The G. kosen, signifying originally to chat or talk familiarly with each other, is applied in a secondary sense to caresses or gestures expressive of affection; liebkoscn, to caress. In the same way the radical signification of cuddle seems to be whisper, chat, confidential communication, then embracing, lying close. Cuddle is a parallel form with cushle in Sc. cushle-mushle, low whisper-ing conversation, which in Banffshire be-comes cuddle-muddle, speaking in a low muttering voice. 'A got thim cuddle-muddlin' wi ane anither at the back o' a dyke.' To cuddle, to speak in a low tone of voice, mostly of lovers, to coax, to en-tice; cuddle, conversation in a low tone; a very close intimacy. ' They hine an unco cuddle thegeether.'
In the same way NE. cutter, to whisper, to speak low, to coo; also to fondle.— Hal. Swiss kudern, küderlen, to talk together like lovers, to fondle. Sw. quittra, to chirp, to whisper. Du. kout, chat, familiar conversation.

Cudgel. Du. kodse, kudse, a club, knobbed stick; knodse, knudse, a knotted stick, knodsen, knudsen, tundere, contun-dere, batuere.—Kil. The origin is pro-bably a form like It. cozzare, to knock.

Cue. The last words of the preceding speech, prefixed to the speech of an actor in order to let him know when he is to come on the stage.
From the letter Q by which it was marked. ' Q, a note of entrance for act-ors, because it is the first letter of quando, when, showing when to enter and speak.'—C. Butler, Eng. Gram., 1634, in N. and Q., Aug. 5, 1865. Minsheu explains it somewhat differently. ' A qu, a term used among stage-players, à Lat. qualis, i. e. at what manner of word the actors are to begin to speak, one after another hath done his speech.'
Buckingham. Had you not come upon your Q, my lord, William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part.—Rich. III.
The Fr. term is réplique.

Cuff. Hamburg kuffen, to box the ears; Sw. dial. kuffa, to strike; skuffa, to push, to jog; It. schiaffo, a cuff, slap or clap on the cheek. The cuff of a sleeve is the part that is doubled back and flaps against the sleeve. Sw. klaff, a flap, as of a hat or glove, the cuff of a coat. Sp. golpe, a blow, also the flap of a pocket.

Cuirass. Fr. cuirasse; It. corazza, quasi coriacea, made of leather, from Lat. corium, a skin.—Diez. So Lat. lorica, a cuirass, from lorum, a strap. OFr. cuirie, Port. coura, a leather jerkin; couraça, a cuirass; couro, a hide, skin.

To Cull. To pick out. Cullers are the worst of a flock culled out for dis-posal. Fr. cueillir, Lat. colligere, to gather. To cull is also, like It. cogliere, used in the sense of to strike. The Ancren Riwle speaks of the cull of an axe for the blow of an axe.

Cullender.—Cullis. A cullender or colander is a strainer, from Lat. colare, to strain; Fr. couler, to run (of liquids), to flow. Sp. colar, to strain or filter; colada, lye, strained ashes for washing; coladera, a colander or strainer. So from scavage, scavenger, from passage, pas-senger, &c.

Cullis. Fr. coulis, strained juice of meat, &c.

Cully. Properly the entertainer or companion of a courtesan. A lecher whom a courtesan or jilt calls her cully.—B. From Fr. couille. Thence a fool, a soft-headed fellow, one who may be easily led by the nose or put upon.—B.
To cully one, to make a tool of, impose upon, or jilt him.—B.
Tricks to cully fools.—Pomfret in R.
See Cozen.

Culm. This term is now applied to the kind of coal found not in solid lumps but in a loose powdery condition. The proper meaning is smut, and the latter name is given in Pembrokeshire to a superficial layer of coal in a still more imperfect condition than culm. ' Culme of smeke—fuligo.'—Pr. Pm.
Thanne Pacience perceyved of pointes of this cote, That were colomy thorugh coveitise and unkynde desiryng.—P. P.
Colmie, black, foul, dirty; becolmed, blackened.—King Horn. Probably con-nected with collow or colly, smut, soot.

Culminate. Lat. culmen, a top, a peak.

Culpable. Lat. culpa, a fault, culpo, to find fault with, blame.

Culprit. The name by which a prisoner on his trial is addressed when he has pleaded not guilty. Probably a corruption of culpat for culpatus, the term for a person accused in the old Law Latin.

Cultivate.—Culture. Lat. colo (p.p. cultus), to till or dress the ground, to bestow labour or pains upon.

Culverin. Fr. couleuvrine (from cou-leuvre, Lat. coluber, a snake), a cannon, or sometimes a handgun. See Caliver.

Culvert. A covered passage for water under a road. The Fr. couvert is not used in this sense, nor is it easy to see how the l could have been introduced on the supposition of a derivation from that source. The E. counties' name is oolve, hoolve, hulve, or wulve, doubtless from hulve (Hal.) or whelve, to cover over, and possibly culvert Tasytt a corruption from this source.—Atkinson.
Cumber.—Encumber. See Comber.
-cumula-.—Cumulative. Lat. cumu-lus, a heap, cumulo, to pile or heap up. Accumulate, to heap together.
Cunning. See Con.
Cup. Fr. coupe. It. coppa, Du. kop, Bret. gôb, kôp, skôp. The notion of a round projection and of something hol-low are often expressed by the same word, which is often taken from the sound of a blow, and especially a blow on a hollow body. Thus we have seen boss, a lump or projection, and boss, hollow. The G. napf, Lang. nap, a bowl or porrenger, is a slight variation of knopf, a knob or knop, and both meanings are united in W. cnapen, a knob, a bowl, while the origin of the word seems a representation of the sound of a blow or a thing break-ing ; E. knap, to snap, to strike.—Hal. Now the G. kopf signifies both cup and cop, or top, knob, head ; köpfchen, a tea-cup, kopf, a cupping-glass. The develop-ment of the meaning is well illustrated in the Fin. kopista, to resound from a blow; kopina, the sound of a blow; kopio, empty, sounding as an empty vessel; koppa, anything concave or hollow, as the box of a harp, the cup of a pipe. On the other hand, as in the case of boll and buckle, we are led to the image of a bub-ble, as the type of anything round and prominent, swollen, hollow. Fin. kuppo,—a, —u, a bubble, boil, tumour ; kupia, swelling, puffed ; kupu, the crop of birds, head of a cabbage ; kupukka, anything globular ; kuppi, a cup, kuppata, to bleed by cupping.
Cupboard. Originally a board or shelf for cups, as Du. glasenberd (berd, board), a receptacle for glasses.—Kil.
Cupel. Fr. coupelle, a coppell, the little ashen pot or vessel wherein gold-smiths melt or fine their metals.—Cot. From coupe, a cup.
Cupidity.—Concupiscence. Lat. cu-piditas, desire, avidity, covetousness, from cupio, I wish, desire, long for. See Covet.
* Cupola. It. cupola, a round vaulted chapel behind the chancel ; some use it for any round arch or vault of a church or copped steeple.—Fl. Plausibly con-nected with Fr. coupeau, the top or head of a thing, coupeau de la tête, the crown of the head ; or with It. cupo, deep, hol-low, high. But probably the word may be an importation from the East, where the dome was a favourite form of archi-tecture. An open cupola had been erected by former generations over the source. Order was given in consequence to destroy the cupola and the baths. The imperial decree was executed, and the remains of the Kuhbak or dome, &c.—Pals-grave, Central Arabia, ii. 140. Ar. kubbat, kubba, a dome or cupola.—Catafogo.
* Cur. A snarling dog ; currish, snarl-ing, malignant. Du. korre, a housedog.—K. From ON. kurra, G. kurren, gurren, to grumble, mutter. Gurrige Ehehälfte, a jangling wife.—Musäus. Compare G. kur-re, OE. currefish (Cot. in v. cocti). Da. knur-fisk, a gurnard, from its muttering sounds.
-cur.—Current.—Curricle. Lat. curro, cursum, to run ; currens, running, passing along ; curriculum, a light car ; concurro, to run along with, to coincide in thought or feeling. To Incur, Recur.
Curate.—Curator.—Curious. Lat. curator, one who takes care, from curo, to care for, look to, curiosus, inquiring, employing care in inquiry.
Curb.—Curve.—Curvet. Fr. courber, to crook, bow, arch ; courbette, a small crooked rafter, the curvetting of a horse. Lat. curvus, crooked. Gael. crup, con-tract, crouch, shrink ; crub, crouch, sit, squat ; crubadh, bending ; Manx crib, curb, contract, shrink ; W. crwb, a round hunch ; crwbach, a hook, crook ; crybwck, shrunk, crinkled. The insertion of the nasal gives AS. crumb, crump, crymbig, crooked ; G. krumm, crooked ; Gael. crom, bend, bow, stoop.
Curd.—Curdle. To curdle, to become lumpy ; curds, the lumpy part of milk. Formerly more correctly written cruddle, crud. W. criud, a round lump (Spurrell) ; crwt, a dumpy person ; Pol. gruda, grud-ka. Boh. hruda, hrudka, a clod, lump, ball, clot. For the origin of the word see Crottles.
Cure. Lat. cura, care ; originally pro-bably sorrow, lamentation, as we see that the E. sorrow is the equivalent of G. sorge, diligence, care, sorrow ; sorgen, to take care of. The origin is preserved in Fin. kurista, voce strepo stridente, inde mur-muro vel segre fero, quirito ut infans. It must thus be considered a relation of Lat. queror, to complain. Fin. kurina, stridor, murmur, kurja, wretched, sad, miserable. ON. kurr, murmur, complaint, grating ; kurra, to coo as a dove, to murmur.
Curfew. Fr. couvrefeu, courefeu, Lat. ignitegium, the notice for covering or putting out lights at a certain hour in the evening.

Item quod nullus tabernarius seu braciator teneat tabernam suam apertam post horam ignitegii.—Lib. Alb. I. 251.
Curl. Formerly written crull, croule, croll, in accordance with Du. krol, krolle, N. krull. The sense of a vibratory or rolling movement, and thence of a spiral or twisted form, is commonly expressed by forms representing in the first instance a rattling or rumbling sound. Thus It. rototare, to roll along, is essentially the same with E. rattle, G. kollern, to rumble, is also used in the sense of rolling along, and the word roll itself is equally familiar in both senses. We speak of the roll of a drum, the rolling of thunder, as well as the rolling of a carriage or a roll of paper. It seems certain that when the form rol appears in the Romance languages it is a contraction from a fuller form, like It. rotolare, equivalent to our rattle; but in other cases the syllable may have been framed as it stands to represent a rumbling or murmuring sound, as in Illyrian ruliti, to bellow, Swiss rollen, for the rushing sound of a brook. In like manner the form crol or croul, expressing vibratory sound, and thence vibratory movement, may be a contraction from forms like Gr. κρόταλον, a rattle, as in Prov. crotlar, crollar, Fr. crodler, crosler, croler, to shake, E. dial. crudle, crule, to shudder, shiver; or in other cases the root may have been framed as it stands as a direct representation of the sound it is intended to express, as in Illyr. kruliti, to growl, to rumble (like the bowels); G. grollen, to rumble like thunder; Fr. grougouler, grouiller, to rumble; E. dial. crool, to mutter, murmur; crawl, crowl, croll, to grumble, rumble like the bowels. For the connection between quivering and curling compare Lat. vibrati crines, curled hair. Again, from the crackling sound of things frying we have Fr. graller, griller, grosler, groller, G. krollen (in kroll-erbsen, carlings or parched peas), to parch or fry; from whence we pass to the sense of curling, on the same principle on which E. frizzle signifies both to fry in grease and also to curl. Fr. greziller, to crackle as salted flesh on coals, also to curl, twirl, frizzle hair.—Cot. Each separate element of the crackling sound represents to the mind an abrupt movement of some element of the crackling body, which is brought into a contorted shape by the aggregate action of its separate parts. The radical connection between the ideas of shivering and curling which is seen in E. dial. crule, Ditmarsh krule (Outzen), to shiver, shudder, is also exemplified in G. graus, shuddering, horror, compared with kraus, Sw. krus, curly, from whence again we are brought to G. kräuseln, to curl.
Curlew. Fr. courlis; OFr. corlieu.—Cot. Berri. guerlu. Probably from the shrill cry of the bird. Russ. kurluikat', to cry like a crane.
Curmudgeon. A corn-mudgin was a dealer in corn, a most unpopular class of persons in times of scarcity, as they were always supposed to be keeping up the price of corn by their avarice. The ædiles curule hung up 12 brazen shields made of the fines that certain corn-mudgins paid for hoarding up their grain.—Holland's Livy in R. The origin of the element mudgin would seem to be G. mausche, mauschel, a contemptuous name for a Jew, and thence a huckster, from a jeering imitation of their way of pronouncing the name Moses. Korn-Jude, korn-mausche, a corn-mudgin. Swab. mauschen, to huck or deal in small matters.
Currant. In Liber Cure Cocorum called raysyns of corouns, Fr. raisins de Corinthe; the dried small grapes of the Greek islands. Then applied to our own sour fruit of somewhat similar appearance.
* To Curry.—Currier. The etymology of these words has been much confused by the coalescence of two forms of wholly different origin. From Lat. corium, a hide, coriarius was used in Mid.Lat. for a maker of or worker in leather, a tanner, shoemaker, beltmaker. Coriarius, corrarius, coreator, leder-maker,—zouwer,—gerber, lederer, schuochmacher.—Dief. Supp. ' Coriarius, seu calciamentorum sutor.'—Vita S. Emmer. in Carp. At the same time from Lat. corrigia, Fr. courroie, a strap, was formed corrigiarius, Fr. courroier, a maker of straps or girdles, which seems to have been confounded with corier from coriarius. We find at least in the Statuta Coriariorum of the city of Abbeville a provision, ' Que nulz Coriers faice coroies estoffees de plonc d'estain sur l'amende de la ville.' In a record of A. D. 1365 mention is made 'comme Willemet Cotenchi corier eust plusieurs chozes et hostiz (outils) de son mestier de correrie, qui par justice avoient été mises en garde à Hesdin.' 'Jehan le Doys sainturier et courroier.'—Rec. A. D. 1456 in Carp. From corier was formed E. coriour, a tanner, the term by which Wickliff describes the trade of Simon in Acts, ix. x., answering to coriarius in the Vulgate. Coryowre, corianus, cerdo.—Pr. Pm.

On the other hand, we hardly doubt that the verb to curry or dress leather is from Fr. corroyer, conroyer, or with the close vowel of the Norman dialect cou-rier, signifying generally to dress or pre-pare materials, to set in order for some particular application, and specially to dress leather, corium subigere, polire; conroyeur, corroyeur, a currier or leather-dresser, artisan qui donne aux cuirs la dernière preparation.—Trev. Piaus de moutons que l'on appele piaus de Damas, conrees en alun: dressed with alum.—Joinville cited by Marsh. I curry leather: je courroie.—Palsgr.

Other applications mentioned in Tre-voux are to puddling clay for holding water, dressing of timber, forging of iron. O. Fr. corroi, dressing of leather, order of battle. Sp. conrear, to dress wool. It. corredare, to rig or furnish a ship, to trim a bride. The ultimate origin is the figure of setting in order from the root rad, row, line, whence Du. rooi, and E. row, order, rank. See Ready, Array. It is a strong proof that the verb to curry is from Fr. corroyer and not from the OE. coriour, in that it is not confined to the sense of dressing leather, but like the Fr. verb is used for dressing the coat of a horse.

Li vilains son roncin atorne, Et frote et conroie et estrille.
Fab. et Contes, 3. 198.
Receurent les destrers e les forz mulz amblanz A les osteus les meinent conreer gentement.
Travels of Charlemagne cited by Marsh.

In the latter example the verb is used in the general sense of taking care of. A currycomb is a comb for dressing the coats of horses.

To curry favour is a proverbial ex-pression corrupted from 'curry Favel,' Fr. étriller Fauveau, to curry the chest-nut horse. 'Tel étrille Fauveau que puis le mord, the ungrateful jade bites him that does him good.—Cot. G. den Falben streichen, den falben Hengst streichen (literally to rub down the chestnut), to flatter, cajole.—Kütrn. Curry-favell, a flatterer: estrille-fauveau.—Palsgr. It was usual to make a proper name of the colour of a horse, and to speak of the animal as Bayard, Dun, Lyard (Fr. liart, grey), Ball (whitefaced), Favel (Fr. Fau-veau, from fauve, fallow), and any of these was taken proverbially for horse in general. 'Dun is in the mire.' 'Who so bold as blind Bayard?'
The knyght or squier on that other side Or the man that hath in pees or in werre Dispent with his lorde his bloode, but he hide The trouthe, and cory favelle, he not the ner is His lordes grace.—Occleve, De regimine princi-pum, p. 189.
When the meaning of Favel in the proverb was no longer understood, the sense was made up by the substitution of favour.

Curse. Sw. kors (cross)! interjection, as Fr. mon dieu! bon dieu! AS. corsian, to execrate by the sign of the cross. E. Fris. kriiis, the cross; kriiisken, kriii-zigen, to curse.—Stürenberg. In Fr. we find sacrer used both in the senses of consecrating or execrating. An appeal to the Deity is made in both cases, but in the one case he is called on to execute vengeance on the devoted object, in the other it is offered to his gracious accept-ance. So ON. blóta, to consecrate and to curse.

Curst. Ill-tempered, cross-grained. 'Kate the curst.' OE. crus, wrathful.—Havelok, 1966. The familiar crusty, ill-tempered, may perhaps be a metaphor from the rugged surface of crust, but it is by no means certain that it is not an offshoot from the stem to which belong OE. crus, curst, Fr. courroux. It. corruc-cio, curccio, wrath. In a passage of the treatise called 'Deadly Sins,' cited by Dr R. Morris, the earlier version, the Cursor Mundi, has crustful, which is replaced by ireful in the later version.

* Curt. Lat. curtus, short, stumpy.
Curtain. Mid. Lat. cortina, a small inclosed court or yard, 'Domuncula mi-nor cum cortina, vineâ, &c.' Hence the name seems to have been given to the curtains or hangings by which a small in-closure was made round an altar or chapel in a church or a bed in a cham-ber. 'Cortina est ornamentum Ecclesia-rum vel tabernaculorum, sicut vela depic-ta, quæ in lateribus altarium suspenduntur ne sacerdos aspectu circumstantium con-fundatur.'—Breviloquium in Duc.

Curtal.—Curtail. From Fr. court, short, with a modification of the termina-tion ard (seen in Bayard, dastard, drunk-ard), is formed courtault, courtaut. Mid. Lat. curtaldus, E. curtal, having a docked tail. To curtail is a different word, from court tailler, to cut short.

Curtsy. Fr. courtiser, to court, enter-tain with all compliments or offices of respect and observance; courtoisie, cour-tesy, civility.—Cot. But I am inclined to believe that the word fundamentally signifies to cross oneself, put oneself into the reverent position of those who make the sign of the cross. It is commonly pronounced curchy, and in Pembrokeshire a girl is told to make her crutch or curch. I croutche, I make humble reverence.—Palsgr. It. far croce, star colle braccia in croce, to cross the arms on the breast (often joined with bowing or kneeling), as an attitude of reverence.—La Crusca; riverenza, a curtsy or bending to another with the knee.—Fl. Faire reverence à, to arise, give place, make courtesie, vaile bonnet unto; to solicit with cap and knee.—Cot.

Curve. See Curb.

Curvet. Fr. courbette, the prancings of a managed horse, in which he bends his body together and springs out.

-cuse. Lat. causa, matter in question, suit at law, something laid to the charge of one. Hence accuso, to bring a charge against one; excuse, to relieve one from a charge; recuso, to refuse, to say no to the matter in question.

Cushion. Fr. coussin: It. coscino, cuscino. G. küssen, ON. koddi, a cushion. See Cod.

-cuss-. Lat. quatio, quassum, in comp. -cutio, -cussum, to shake, strike, shatter. Hence concussion, percussion.

Custard. A corruption of the obsolete crustade, a dish which appears in the bills of fare of the 14th century, and was composed of some kind of stew served up in a raised crust. In a bill of fare of a century later mention is made of a blaunche custade.—Wright, Hist. of Domestic Manners, 355. 'Custade costable when eggs and crayme be geason.'—Babees Book, 170.

Custody. Lat. custodia; custos, a guard, keeper.

Custom. It. costume, Fr. coustume, coutume. Sp. costumbre, from consuetudo, consuetudinis, through the medium, as Diez supposes, of a softened form consuetumen. So from mansuetudo, Sp. mansedumbre. Port. mansedume.

Cut. I. Sw. dial. kata, to cut small, to work in wood, to whittle, kata ur, to hollow out; ON. kuta, to cut; N. kutte, to cut off; Sw. dial. kuta, kytti, a knife; kutts, a bit; w. cwtt, catt, a little piece, a cut, a gobbet; cwt, a short tail; cwttogi, to curtail, abridge. Turk. kat', a cutting, kat'et, to cut; kifa, a piece, a segment.

2. A term of abuse for a woman. See Cotquean.

Cuticle. Lat. cutis, the skin.

Cutlas.—Curtal-axe. It. coltello and the augmentative coltellaccio become in the Venetian dialect cortelo, a knife, and cortelazo, a pruning-knife or bill. Hence the OE. courtelas, and with that striving after meaning, which is so frequent a cause of corruption, curtal-axe. Fr. coutelas, a cuttelas or courtelas, or short sword.—Cot.

Cutler. Fr. coutelier, a maker of knives, from couteau, formerly written cousteau, coulteau. It. coltello, Venet. cortelo, a knife, the r of which last has perhaps passed into the s of cousteau. But this is not necessary, as an example of the same change in the opposite direction is seen in the OFr. coultre, for coustre, a sexton, from custos. Lat. culter, cultellus, w. cyllel, a knife.

Cutlet. Fr. cotelette, dim. from côte, rib, side, coast, from Lat. costa, a rib.

Cuttle-fish. Fr. cornet, a sea-cut or cuttle-fish.—Cot. Du. see-katte, w. morgylleil, the sea-knife, from the knife or feather-shaped bone contained in its body. In some parts of France it is called cousteau de mer. Cousteau, the principal feather in a hawk's wing, termed by our falconers cut or cuttie.—Cot.

Cycle. A periodic space of time. Gr. κύκλος, a circle.

Cyclopaedia. Gr. Κυκλοπαιδεία (κύκλος, a circle, παιδεία, instruction), a complete round of information.

Cygnet. Lat. cygnus, cycnus, Fr. cygne, a swan.

Cylinder. Lat. cylindrus, Gr. Κύλινδρος, from κυλίνδω, to roll.

Cymbal. Gr. Κύμβαλον, a cymbal; κύμβος, a cavity, hollow vessel, goblet. From an imitation of the sound of striking a hollow object. Compare Gr. κοπτέω, to clank; Fin. kopina, the sound of a blow, kopano, a hollow tree, sounding hollow when struck. Lat. campana, a bell; Alb. kembone, a cattle-bell.

Cynic. Lat. cynicus, from Gr. Κύων, Κυνός, a dog; κυνικός, like a dog, belonging to a dog.

To Dabble.—Dab. Dabble, daddle, daggle, and wabble, waddle, waggle, are parallel series formed on a similar plan, and all apparently representing in the first instance the agitation or dashing of liquid matters. The sense is then extended to the dashing of wet or even solid things, and thence to a separate portion of a substance more or less coherent, so much as is thrown down at once. ODu. dabbelen. Norm. dauber (Héricher), to tramp in the mire; dabbelen, dabben, to bemire.—BigL. Sc. dub, a puddle. In the sense of dashing or giving a smart push— He gart the loon's heid cry dab amo' the yird. He dabbit the loon's nose amo' the dubs. Dab your heid doon.—Banff. Gl.
Norm. dauber, to bang. 'La porte daube.' A dab of dirt is a lump of dirt thrown and sticking where it falls. The word is specially applied to a lump of something moist or soft, and hence to dab, to touch with something moist. See Daddle, Dad, 2.
The notion of a smart push is sometimes specialised to a prick or thrust with a pointed instrument. He keepit a dabban o't doon intil a hole. Banff. Gl.
To dab or daub, to prick, to peck as birds. —Jam. To dab in some parts of England is used, as dibble in others, for making holes in a furrow with a pointed instrument for the planting of seed. The notion of striking is more general in Fr. dauber, to beat, drub, thresh, and in E. dab-hand, one who does a thing off hand, at a single blow. So Lang. tapa, to strike, to do a thing skilfully and quickly.—Dict. Castr.
Dobchick.—Dobchick. Fr. plongeon, Norm. daube (Héricher), the lesser grebe, takes the foregoing names from its habit of constantly dabbing or bobbing under water.
The diving dobchick here among the rest you see, Now up, now down again, that hard it is to prove Whether under water most it liveth or above. Drayton.
Norm. dauber, to dive. Dan. dobbe, Du. dobber, a float; dobberen, to rise and fall with the wave.—Halma.
Dad. w. tad, Lap. dadda (in children's language), father. Almost as universally spread as Baba or Papa.

Dad, 2.—Dawd. This is a word precisely analogous to dab. It is used in the first instance to represent the sound of a blow. Dad, a blow, a thump—Hal.; dad, daud, to thrash, dash, drive forcibly.—Jam. 'He dadded to the door,' slammed it to. 'He fell with a dad.' Also, to throw mire so as to bespatter, to dawb. Hence dad, dawd (as dab, dabbet, above), a large piece, a lump, lunch. Swiss dätsch, smack, sound of a blow; datsch, dotsch, smack, blow with something broad, broad lump of something soft. See Daddle.
Daddock, dadick, rotten wood, is the dim. of the above. It signifies wood in a state in which you can pick it bit from bit. Hence dadacky, decayed, tasteless.
Daddle. In low language, the hand. Tip us your daddles, shake hands. Hesse, datsche, a paw or hand, in a contemptuous sense; Westerwald, tatschgen, patschgen, a hand (in children's lang.), from datscheln, tatschen, tätscheln, to paddle with the hands, to handle improperly. Tatsch hand (Sanders), Pl.D. patsche, patsch hand, the hand, to children. The radical meaning of daddle, of G. datscheln, tatscheln, as well as the synonymous paddle, patscheln, is to dabble in the wet. Sc. daddle, daidle, to draggle, bedabble one's clothes, do work in a slovenly way. To daddle and drink, to be continually tippling, as to paddle in Devon to take too much drink.—Hal. Then, perhaps from the wavering of an agitated liquid, to daddle is to walk unsteadily like a child, to waddle.—Grose. In the same way to daddle, to walk with difficulty, like a child or an old person.—Atkinson. Hess. datteln, daddeln, dotteln, doddeln, to toddle, to walk unsteadily, to stagger.
To Dade.—Dading-strings. To dade is applied to the first vacillating steps of a child. To dade a child, to teach him to walk; dading-strings, NE. paddling-strings, strings by which he is held up while beginning to dade or paddle; leading-strings.
Which nourished, and brought up at her most plenteous pap, No sooner brought to dade, but from her mother trips—But eas'ly from her source as Isis gently dades. Drayton.
We have seen that the primary sense of daddle is to dabble or paddle in the wet, then to waddle or walk imperfectly like a child. And as wade is related to waddle, so is dade to daddle.
Daffodil. Corrupted from Lat. asphodelus. Fr. asphodile, aphrodille, the daffodill, affodill, or asphodill flower.—Cot.
Dag.—Dagger. The syllable dag or dig, like dab or dib, represents a sudden thrust, then the instrument with which the thrust is given, or anything of similar form. Bret. dagi, to stab; OE. dag, to pierce.
Derfe dyntys they dalte with daggande sperys. Morte Arthure in Hal.
Fr. dague. It. daga, E. dagger, a short stabbing weapon. OE. dag, a small projecting stump of a tree, a sharp sudden pain.—Hal. Dag is then a projecting point, a jag, and specially the jags or slashing with which garments were ornamented.
So much dagging of sheres with the superfluity in lengthe of the foresaide gounes.—Chaucer.
Dagge of cloth, fractillus.—Pr. Pm. Dagon, a slice. 'A dagon of your blanket, leve dame.'—Ch. Daglets, icicles, or jags of ice. Dag-locks, clotted locks hanging in dags or jags at a sheep's tail. Fin. takku, a shaggy fleece, takku-willa, dag-wool, takkuinen, matted, shaggy, dagged. OE. dag-swain, a bed-covering of shaggy material.
Some dagswaynes have long thrumys (fractillos) and jags on bothe sydys, some but on one.—Herman in Way.
To Daggle. To trail in the dirt, to run like a child; daggly, wet, showery.—Hal. To dagg, to sprinkle with water; dagged, wet, bedaggled.—Atkinson. Sw. dial. dagg, a sup or small portion of liquid; Da. dugge, bedugge, to bedew; Devon. dugged, dugged tealed, daggletailed.
Formed on a plan analogous to dabble or daddle, and signifying in the first instance working in something wet. The place of the liquid is transposed in Bav. dalken, to work in wet or pasty materials, to work unskilfully; verdalken, to besmear, bedaggle; dalket, doughy, clammy, awkward; Hesse dalgen, to handle improperly, to paw. A like transposition is seen in dabble and dallop, wabble and wallop, in G. schwappeln, to splash, and Swiss schwalpen, to sway to and fro, and many other cases.
Dail—Dale. A trough in which the water runs from the pump over the decks of a ship.—B. The course of development seems as follows. W. twll, Bret. toull, a hole, cavity; Pol. dol, a pit. Then a hollow where water collects, a sink, gully, drain, gutter, spout.
Swiss dole, a pit, hollow, sink, drain; OHG. dola, cloaca, fistula; Fr. dalle, a sewer or pit whereinto the washings and other such ordure of houses are conveyed—Cot.; in Normandy a spout or channel to void water by.—Roquefort. Sp. dala, the pump-dale of a ship. ON. dæl, a depression, dæla, a bucket for drawing water from a well, a sea-pump.
Dainty. W. dant, a tooth; dantaidd (as E. toothsome), dainty, delicate. Bav. däntsch, a delicacy, däntschig, dainty, nice in eating; NE. danch, s. s. OE. daunch, donch, fastidious, over-nice.—Hal.
Dairy.—Dey. The dey was a servant in husbandry, mostly a female, whose duty was to make cheese and butter, attend to the calves and poultry and other odds and ends of the farm. The deyy, deyty, or dairy, was the department assigned to her. 'A deye, androchius, androchea (for androgynus, either man or woman), genatarius, genetharia; a derye, androchiarium, bestiarium, genetheum (for gyneceum, the woman's apartment, place where the weaving was done). '—Cath. Ang. in Way. 'Caseale, a dey-house where cheese is made.'—Elyot in Hal. In Gloucestershire a dairy is still so called. In the 37 Edw. III., A.D. 1363, are classed together 'bovers, vachers, porchers, deyes et touz autres gardeirez des bestes,' the word deyes being translated in the English version deyars or dairy-men, and in 12 Rich. II. deye and deyrie, woman.
The duties of the dey are mentioned by Neccham.
Assit et androgia quæ gallinis ova supponat et anseribus acra substernat; quæ agnellos morbidos in sua teneritate lacte foveat alieno. Vitulos autem et subrumos ablactatos inclusos teneat in pargulo juxta fenile, &c. The milking of the cows and feeding the weanlings by hand would naturally fall to the same attendant, and hence the origin of the name as rightly pointed out by Jamieson. Dan. dagge, to feed with foreign milk; dæggeharn, a nurse child; dæggehorn, a feeding-bottle.
Sw. dæggja, dia, to give suck; dæggja, dairy-maid. N. deia, deigja, generally signifies a maidservant; budeia (bu, cattle), one who looks after the cattle, milkmaid; rakstadeie, woman engaged to rake hay, haymaker; reiddeia, housemaid, woman whose business is to look after and set the house to rights. ON. deigja, a maid-servant, female slave, a concubine. Pol. doiti, to milk cows, &c., dojka, a dairy-maid, dojarnica, a dairy; Bohem. doiti, to milk or give milk; dogka, a wet-nurse, nurse-maid.

Dais. Fr. Dais or daiz, a cloth of estate, canopy or heaven that stands over the heads of Princes' thrones; also the whole state or seat of estate.—Cot. OFr. dais, deis, a table, from discus. 'A curt esterras, e a mun deis tuz jurs mangeras.'—L. des Rois. 'Un jor seeit al maistre deis:' one day he (the king) sat at the principal table or high dease.—Chron. Norm. The name was then transferred to the raised step on which the high table was placed, or the canopy over it.

Daisy. Day's eye. AS. dæges eáge.
That well by reason men it call may The deisie or els the eye of the day.
Chaucer in R. Rose.

Dell. W. twll, a hole, pit, dimple,—mwn, a mine-shaft; Bret. toull, a hole or cavity; Pol. dol, bottom, pit; dolek, a little pit or hole, socket of the eye, dimple; dolina, valley; Bohem. dul, a pit, shaft in a mine, dulek, a de-pression, pock-mark, dolina, a valley. Goth. dal, a valley, gulf, pit; G. thal, a valley. Dan. dal, a valley, dæl, a de-pression; E. dale, a valley, dell, a depres-sion in a hill-side. The E. had also a diminutive corresponding to the Slavonic dolek; 'dalke, vallis.'—Pr. Pm. Delk, a small cavity in the body or in the soil.—Forby. 'Le fosset oue col, dalke in the neck.'—Bibelsworth in Way.

Dallop. To dallop, to paw, toss or tumble about carelessly; dallop, a slat-tern, a trollop (Forby), a clumsy and shapeless mass.—Hal. N. dolp, a lump, a hanging bob. W. talp, a lump. The sense of a shapeless lump is often connected with that of paddling or dab-bling, as in dab and dabble, dad or dawd and daddle. And the sense of over-hand-ling follows close on that of dabbling with wet things. ON. dálpa or damla, to paddle or row softly; Hesse dalgen, del-pen, dalmen, to paw or handle overmuch; to dallop, to over-nurse.—Whitby. Gl. Dallop is in fact related to dabble as wallop to wabble, or Hess. dalgen to E. daggle.

To Dally. The radical sense seems to be to talk imperfectly like a child, then to act like a child, trifle, loiter. G. dah-len, dallen, to stammer, tattle, trifle. 'Wer lehrt den Psittacum unser wort DAM dallen?'—Sanders. 'Die tunge lallt und lallt.'—Deutsch. Mund. 4. 188. 'Alte leute muss man dalen lassen.'—Schmeller. G. dial, dalejt, to speak or act childishly, to trifle, toy, dawdle—D. M. 3. 418; dol-len, tælen, to play, work without earnest-ness.—4. 188. To dwallee or dwaule, to talk incoherently.—Exmoor Scolding. Dalyyn or talkyn, fabulor, colloquor; dalyaunce, confabulacio.—Pr. Pm. Pl.D. dwalen, to jest, sport, act irrationally; dwalse, a simpleton. The word seems to arise from a mock-ing imitation of senseless chatter by syl-lables without meaning, like fal-lal-la! ta-la-la! tilly vally! or tilly fally! dilly-dally! G. lari fari! Fr. tarare! Lang. ta-ta-ta! interjections intimating one's contempt for what is said. In parts of Germany childish behaviour in a grown person is jeered by a rigmarole beginning with tillum tallum, tille talle, or tall-tall.—D. M. 3. 414. Bav. dilledelle, delle-melle, a simpleton.

Dam.—Dame. Lat. domina, It. dama, Fr. dame, a lady. From being used as a respectful address to women it was ap-plied, κατ' ἐξοχήν, to signify a mother, as sire to a father.
Enfant qui craint ni pere ni mere Ne peut que bien ne le comperre.
For who that dredith sire ne dame Shall it abie in bodie or name.—R. R. 5887.
—And fykel tonge hure syre Amendeswas hure dame.—P. P. in R.
Faithlesse, forsworn, ne goddesse was thy dam.
Nor Dardanus beginner of thy race.—Surry in R.
Subsequently these terms were confined to the male and female parents of ani-mals, especially of horses.

Dam. A word of far-spread connec-tions with much modification of form and sense. The fundamental signification is the notion of stopping up, preventing the flow of a liquid. Goth. faur-dammjan, to shut up, obstruct, hinder; Pol. tamo-wać, to stop, staunch, obstruct, dam; tama, a dam, dike, causeway. ON. dam-nir, Dan. dam, a fish pond. OSw. damfn, a dam. Bav. damm, daumb, taum, Fr. tampon, tapon, the wad of a gun; Bav. daumen, verdaumben, Fr. taper, to ram down, to stop the loading from fall-ing out. Here we are brought to a root tap instead of tam, and it will be seen that the change might as easily take place from tap through tamp to tam, as in the opposite direction from tam to tap. The evidence preponderates in favour of the originality of the latter form. The idea of stopping up an orifice is naturally expressed by a word signifying a tuft or bunch, as Fr. boucher, to stop, bouchon, a cork, from OFr. bousche, a handful or bunch; étouffer, to stop the breath, from touffe, a tuft, lock of hair, clump of trees. Now the Sw. tapp, a bunch, has precisely the signification required. Hötapp, halm-tapp, a wisp of hay or straw; tapp-vis, by handfuls. Then, from a bunch of fibrous matter being used in stopping an orifice, tapp, a bung, tap, plug. Hence tappa, to stop a hole, to staunch, and in a wider sense to shut, shut up; tappa et åker, to inclose a field.

Lap. tappet, to shut, to stop; tappa ukseb, shut the door; tappalet, to have the breath stopped, to be suffocated, tappaltak, the asthma; Sw. and-tæppa, shortness of breath, asthma (ande, breath).

Lang. tap, a cork, tapa, tampa, to stop, shut, shut up, inclose, surround; se tampa las aurelios, to stop one's ears; tampa uno porta, to shut a door; tampos, shut-ters.—Dict. Castr. Tampo, a tank or reservoir.—Dict. Lang. Cat. tap, a cork, bung; tapa, the sluice of a mill; tapar, to stop, cover, conceal; taparse el cel, to become covered (of the sky); tapat (of the sky or atmosphere), close.

Ptg. tapar, to stop a hole, to cover; tapado, stopped up, fenced in, thick, close-wrought, tapada, a park, taparse, to darken, grow dark, tapulho, a stopper, tampam, a cover, lid of a box; Sp. tapar, to stop up, choke, cover, conceal; tapon, cork, plug, bung. Fr. tapon, tampon, E. tampion, tamkin, tomkin, a stopple for a cannon.

It will be seen that the Lang. form tampo, a tank, cistern, or reservoir (un-doubtedly from the root tap), agrees ex-actly with the OSw. dampn, a dam or pond; kropp-dampn, a cistern at the top of a building.—Ihre.

Damage. Lat. damnatio, Prov. damp-natge, Fr. dommage. Ut ei nemo contrarietatem vel damnationem adversus eum facere præsumat.—Ep. Car. Martel. in Duc.

Damask. Fr. damasquin; because figured silks, linen, &c., were imported from Damascus.

Damn, -demn. Lat. damnum, loss, injury; damno (in comp. -demno), to condemn.

To Damp. It is impossible to sepa-rate to damp, signifying to check the vital energies, suppress, subdue, from dam, to stop the flow of water by a physical obstacle. The fundamental idea in both cases is the notion of stopping an orifice, and the two senses are not always distinguished by different modes of spelling. The Pol. tamować signifies to dam, to stop, to stop the breath, to check, to restrain. Lang. tapofam, literally, stop-hunger, a damper or hunch of meat to damp the appetite at the beginning of a meal.—Dict. Castr. It is probably from the notion of stopping the breath that the figurative senses of the verb to damp are chiefly derived. Sw. and-tæppa, short-ness of breath; Lap. tappalet, to be suffocated, from Sw. tæppa, Lap. tappet, to stop. OHG. temphen, bedemphen, G. dämpfen, to suffocate, choke, smother; dämpf-leinchen, a cord to hang one, halter.—Adelung; dampf, shortness of breath, dampfig, Du. dempig, dampig, short-winded.

Then as the breath is the common symbol of life, to stop the breath is the most natural expression for putting an end to life, extinguishing, depressing, quelling. G. dämpfen, Du. dempen, Sw. dämpa, to extinguish a light, and also in a figurative sense to repress, to damp. G. aufruhr dämpfen, to suppress a tumult; die dämpfung der lüste, the mortification of lusts.—Küüttn. Sw. dämpa sina begärelsen, to stifle one's passions.

In the south of Germany dämmen is used in the same way; das feuer, pein dämmen, to damp the fire, to still pain; Bav. demmen, dämen, to restrain, quell, extinguish, tame. 'Dämen, domare,' 'Alle irrung nieder zu drücken und zu dämmen,' 'Glut demmen und löschen.'—Schmeller.

Here we are brought to a point at which Gr. δαμάω, Lat. domare, Dan. tæmme, to tame, would seem to break in, as parallel modifications of the same root. Compare Dan. tæmme sine ledenskaber, to curb one's passions (Repp.), with Sw. dämpa sina begärelser, above cited; Lat. domare iracundias.

Damp, 1. The sense of vapour, steam, smoke, expressed by the G. dampf, Du. damp, demp, domp, may have arisen in two ways. The G. dampf signifies short wind, dampfig, breathing with difficulty, and, as the designation of a phenomenon is commonly taken from the most exaggerated manifestation of it, the term may have been applied in the first instance to the breath, and thence to exhalation, steam, smoke. Bav. dampf, contemptuously, the breath.—Schm. Or the designation may have been taken from regarding smoke, dust, vapour, steam, as suffocating, stifling, choking agents. Sw. damb, dust. The G. dampf is explained by Adelung 'any thick smoke, mist, or vapour, especially when it is of sulphureous nature,' where the reference to the idea of suffocation is obvious. Compare Dan. quale, to suffocate, choke, with G. qualm, vapour, smoke. In the choke-damp of our mines there is a repetition of the element signifying suffocation added to supply the loss of that meaning in the E. damp.
2. The sense of moisture expressed by the Du. and E. damp is probably to be explained from the connection of closeness and suffocation with dampness or moisture. Cat. tapat, of the sky or air, covered, close ; Sw. et tapt rum, a close room, room with no vent for the air ; Du. bedompt, stifling, close, confined ; bedompt huis, maison mal percée, obscure, humide ; bedompt, dompig, or dampig weer, dark and damp weather.—Halma. G. dumpfig, musty, damp. The idea of what is light, airy, and open on the one hand, is opposed to what is dark, close, and damp on the other, and hence damp, signifying in the first place close and confined, has passed on to designate the humidity associated with closeness.
Damsel. Fr. demoiselle ; It. damigella, dim. of dama, a lady, from Lat. domina.
Damson.—Damascene. A kind of plum. Mod.Gr. δαμάσκηνον, a plum.
Dance. Fr. danser, G. tanzen, Dan. dandse. The original meaning was doubtless to stamp, in which sense danse, dandse is still used in South Denmark.—Outzen. So in Lat. ' pedibus plaudere choreas,' ' alterno terram pede quatere.' Glosses of 1418, quoted by Schmeller, render applaudebant by tanzten mit den Händen. Dan. dundse, to thump ; Sw. dunsa, to fall heavily ; Du. donsen, pugno sive typhis clava in dorso percutere.—Kil. A like connection is seen between AS. tumbian, to dance, and Pl.D. dumpen, to stamp ; Devonsh. dump, to knock heavily, to stump ; also a kind of dance.—Hal.
Dandelion. Fr. dent de lion, lion's tooth, from the leaves with tooth-like jags directed backwards compared to a lion's jaw.
To Dandle. — Dandy. Dandle is a nasalised form of daddle, which with many allies signifies movement to and fro. E. didder, dodder, to shake ; Sc. diddle, to shake or jog; diddle-daddle, trifling activity, great activity with little result (moving to and fro).—Banff. Gl. Fr. dodiner, to rock, shake, shog, wag up and down; dandiner, to sway the body to and fro ; dodeliner, to rock or jog up and down, to dandle ; dondeliner, to wag the head ; It. dondolare, to dandle a child, to rock or dangle in the air, to loiter or idle ; dondola, a toy, a child's playing baby.—Fl. To dandle signifies in the first instance to toss or rock an infant, thence to toy, play, trifle.
King Henry's ambassadors into France having been dandled by the French during these delusive practices, returned without other fruit of their labours.—Speed in R.
G. tändeln, to trifle, toy, loiter, tändel-schürze, a short apron more for show than for use ; kleider-tand, ostentation in dress.
In like manner may be explained the Sc. dandilly and E. dandy, applied to what is made a toy of, used for play and not for working-day life, finely dressed, ornamental, showy.
And he has married a dandilly wife, She wadna shape nor yet wad she sew, But sit wi' her cummers and fill hersel fu'.
Jam.
A dandy is probably first a doll, then a finely-dressed person. Dandy-cock (quasi toy-cock), a bantam.—Hal.
Dandruff. Bret. tan, tin, Fr. teigne, scurf. W. ton, skin, crust ; marwdon, dead skin, dandruff. Perhaps the W. drwg, bad, evil, may form the conclusion of the E. word dandruff, as if dondrwg, the bad crust or scab.
Danger. Mid.Lat. damnum was used to signify a fine imposed by legal authority. The term was then elliptically applied to the limits over which the right of a Lord to the fines for territorial offences extended, and then to the inclosed field of a proprietor, by the connection which one sees so often exemplified in Switzerland at the present day,—'Entrance forbidden under penalty of 10 fr.' ' Si quis caballum in damnum suum invenerit.'—Leges Luitprand in Duc. 'Exceptis averiis in alieno damno inventis.'—Mag. Chart. 'Dici poterit quod averia capta fuerant in loco certo in damno suo, vel in prato vel alibi in suo separali.'—Fleta. In this sense the word was often rendered dommage in Fr. ' Animalia in damnis dictorum fratrum inventa'—' bestes trouvées prinses en domage'—Monast. Ang. in Duc. ' Qu'en dommaige et en sa garenne le poulain au charreton trouva.'—'Cent. nouv. nouv. Damage then acquired the sense of trespass, intrusion into the close of another, as in the legal phrase damage feasant, whence Fr. damager, to distrain or seize cattle found in trespass. ' Comme Estienne Lucat sergent de Marches eust prins et dommagé une jument.'—Carpent. From this verb was apparently formed the abstract domigerium, signifying the power of exacting a damnum or fine for trespass. ' Sub domigerio alicujus aut manu esse.'—Bracton. Then as damage is written damge in the laws of W. the Conqueror, the foregoing domigerium and the corresponding Fr. domager or damager would pass into damger, danger, the last of which is frequently found in the peculiar sense of damnum and dommage above explained. ' En ladite terre et ou dangier dudit sire trouva certaines bestes desdis habitans. Icelles bestes se boutèrent en un dangier, ou paturage defendu.'—Carp. A. D. 1373.

Narcissus was a bachilere That Love had caught in his daungere (had caught trespassing in his close) And in his net gan him so straine.—R. R.

The term danger was equally applied to the right of exacting a fine for breach of territorial rights, or to the fine or the rights themselves, and the officer whose duty it was to look after rights of such a nature was called sergent dangereux. ' Esquels bois nous avons droits de danger, c'est assavoir que toutes et quantefoiz que aucunes bestes seront trouvées esdis bois, elles seront confisquées à nous —Robert le fort notre sergent dangereux advisa de loing icelles brebis.'—A.D. 1403, in Carp.

To be in the danger of any one, estre en son danger, came to signify to be subjected to any one, to be in his power or liable to a penalty to be inflicted by him or at his suit, and hence the ordinary acceptation of the word at the present day. ' In danger of the judgment—in danger of Hell-fire.'

As the penalty might frequently be avoided by obtaining the licence of the person possessed of the right infringed, the word was applied to such licence, or to exactions made as the price of permission. ' Dangeria (sunt) quando bosci non possunt vendi sine licentia regis, et tunc ibi habet decimam denarium.' 'Judicatum est quod Johannes de Nevilla miles non potest vendere boscos suos de Nevilla sine licentia et dangerio regis.' —Judgment A.D. 1269. ' Concedo tum ipsis quam aliis personis collegii liberum molere—et id facere absque dangerio vel exactione qualibet tenebitur in futurum molendinarius molendini.'—Chart. A.D. 1310, in Carp.

The word then passed on both in Fr. and E. to signify difficulties about giving permission or complying with a request, or to absolute refusal. ' Et leur commanderent que si la roine fesait dangier qu'ils la sachassent (chassassent) à force hors de l'eglise.' ' Comme le tavernier faisoit dangier ou difficulté de ce faire.'—Carpentier.

With danger uttren we all our chaffare, Gret prees at market maketh dere ware, And to gret chepe is holden at litel prise; This knoweth every woman that is wise. W. of Bath.

i.e. we make difficulties about uttering our ware.

I trow I love him bet for he Was of his love so dangerous to me.—Ib.

And thus the martial Erle of Mar, Marcht with his men in richt array—Without all danger or delay Came haistily to the Harlaw. Battle of Harlaw.

To Dangle. The syllables ding dong represent loud penetrating sounds as those of bells or of repeated blows.—Fl. Thence E. dial. dang, to throw down or strike with violence ; Sw. danga, to bang, thump, knock at a door ; Sc. ding, to beat, strike, drive, throw ; to ding on, to attack with violence. Ding dong is used adverbially to represent repeated blows ; dingle-dangle, for the motion of a thing swaying to and fro. ON. dángla, to beat, to dangle or sway to and fro. Sw. dial. dangla, to swing, to totter, saunter ; dangla, dingla, to dangle. Comp. daske, to slap, also to dangle, bob, flap.

Dank. Synonymous with damp, as syllables ending in mp or mb frequently interchange with nk or ng. Thus we have It. cambiare and cangiare, E. dimble and dingle. Probably the two forms have come down together from a high antiquity. We have seen that damp, moist, is derived from the notion of closeness, stopping up, covering, expressed by the root tap, tamp, dam, while parallel with tap, tamp, are a series of equivalent forms, in which the p is exchanged for a c, k. Sp. taco, a tap, stopple, ram-rod ; Cat. tancar, parallel with Lang. tampa, to shut, stop, enclose, fence ; tancar la porta, Lang. tampa uno porta, to shut or fasten the door; Port. tanque, Sp. estanco, a tank, basin, cistern, or pond ; Lang. tampo, estampo, in the same sense. It is probable then that dank has come from the guttural form of the root in the same way as damp from the labial. In both cases the notion of darkness is united with that of dampness, as shutting up or covering is equally adapted to keep out air and light. Thus we have Du. be-dampen, to darken, bedompt, dark, obscure, damp ; dompig, dark. In connection with dank we have Du. donker, OHG. OSax. dunkar, dunkal, G. dunkel, dark, NE. danker, a dark cloud.—Hal. OHG. bitunkalat, nimbosa, petunclit, obducta, as Du. bedompt weer, close, covered, cloudy weather.
Dapper seems in E. first to have been used in the sense of pretty, neat. Dapyr or praty, elegant.—Pr. Pm. Dapper, proper, mignon, godin.—Palsgr. in Way. Godinet, pretty, dapper, feat, indifferently handsome.—Cot.
Applied to a man it signifies small and neat. Du. dapper, strenuus, animosus, fortis, acer, masculus, agilis.—Kil. Pl.D. dapper, active, smart ; dobber, dobbers, sound, good. De kase is nig dobbers, the cheese is not good. Bohem. dobry, good. Wendish debora deefka, a pretty girl.—Ihre in v. daeka. See Deft.
Dapple. From dab, to touch with something soft, is ON. depill, a spot ; leir depill, a dab or spot of clay ; deplottr, spotted, dappled. So from G. düpfen, to dab or touch lightly with something soft, bedüpfelt, dappled. We may compare also Fr. matte, a clot, mattelé, clotted, ciel mattonné, a curdled or mottled sky. The resemblance of dapple grey to ON. apalgrár or apple grey, Fr. gris pommelé, is accidental.
To Dare. I. Goth. gadaursan, dars, daursun, daursta ; AS. dearran, dyrran, dear, durron ; E. dare, durst ; MHG. türren, torste. The ODu. preterite troste shows the passage to E. trust. AS. dyrstig, dristig, bold, Sw. drista, to dare. ON. þora, to dare, þor, boldness ; Gr. θάρρεω, to dare ; θάρσος, trust, θρασύς, bold. Lith. drąsus, drąstus, bold, spirited ; dristi, to dare ; drasinti, to encourage, drasintis, to dare. So ON. diarfr, bold, dirfa, to encourage, dirfaz (in the middle voice, as Lith. drasintis), to dare.
It is not easy to arrive at a consistent theory of the connection of the various forms, or of the development of the signification. Sometimes the root seems to be a form similar to the Lat. durus, hard, Gael. dùr, stubborn, persevering, eager, Sc. dour, bold, hardy, obstinate, hard, whence Gael. dùraig, to adventure, dare, wish (to make bold), dùrachd, desire, earnestness, daring. To endure, to harden oneself under suffering, comes very near the sense of dare ; ' I cannot endure to give pain.' In like manner Fin. tarkenen, tarjeta, præ frigore (vel rarius, timore) valeo vel audeo, non algeo ; to endure to do, in spite of cold or of fear ; en tarkene, I cannot for cold ; tarkenetko menna, can you endure (for cold) to go. Lap. tarjet, to be able to do.
The W. dewr, strong, bold, forms a connecting link between durus, and ON. diarfr, OE. derf, hard, strong, fierce, G. derb, hard, strong, rough, severe, from whence the ON. dirfaz, to dare, is certainly derived. It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the G. dürfen, darf, to dare, to be so bold as to—Küttner, Du. derven, dorven, durven, to dare, are formed in like manner. The confusion with forms like the Du. derven, bederven, dorven, to want, be without, have need, G. bedürfen, to be in need, AS. deorfan, to labour, gedeorf, tribulation, labour, calamity, would be accounted for if we suppose that the fundamental idea in the latter cases was to be in hard or difficult circumstances. The ideas of labour and want are closely connected. The sense of needing expressed by G. dürfen is sometimes found in the OE. dare.
So evene hot that lond ys that men durre selde Here orf in howse awynter brynge out of the felde.—R. G. 112. i. e. that men seldom need to house their cattle in the winter.
The heye men of the lond schulle come bi fore the kyng And alle the yonge men of the lond lete bi fore hym brynge—And heo schulle be such that no prince dorre hem forsalce, Ac for heore prowesse gladliche in to here servise take.—R. G. 112.
He that wyll there axsy Justus—In turnement other fyght, Dar he never forther gon ; Ther he may fynde justes anoon Wyth syr Launfal the knyght. Launfal. 1030.
He wax so mylde and so meke, A mylder man thurt no man seke. Manuel des Pecches, 5826.
The passage from the sense of making bold to that of having power, cause, or permission, exemplified in G. dürfen, is illustrated by Fin. tarjeta, to endure. Lap. tarjet, to be able ; Sw. toras (in the mid. voice), to dare, tora (as G. dürfen), to be possible. Det tor hända, that may happen.

Strength is good unto travaile, Ther no strength may, sleght wille vaile.
Sleght and conyng doth many a chare, Begynneth thing that strength ne dar.
R. Brunne, cxci.
Lith. turreti, to get offspring, to have, possess, to be bound to do a thing; turru eiti, I must go. Comp. Malay brani, to be able, can, also to dare, to venture.
* To Dare. 2. To sink down, lie close, lurk. Daryn or drowpyn or privily to be hydde, latito, lateo.—Pr. Pm. Fr. blotir, to squat, to lie close to the ground like a daring lark or affrighted fowl.—Cot. 'With wodecokkys lerne for to dare!'—Lydgate in Way. To dare birds, to cause them to dare or lie close by frightening them with a hawk, mirror, or other means, for the purpose of netting them.
Pl.D. bedaaren, to be still and quiet; dat weer bedaart, the weather settles; een bedaart man, a man who has lost the heat and violence of youth. Du. bedaard, stilled, calm, moderate.
An old appalled wight, As ben thise wedded men that lie and dare, As in a fourme sitteth a wery hare.—Chaucer.
Then as a lurking terrified creature looks anxiously around, to dare is found in the latter sense. 'To dare, pore or loke about me, je avise alentour. What darest thou on this facyon, me thynketh thou woldest catch larkes.'—Palsgr. in Way. Comp. Bav. dusen, to be still, either for the sake of listening, or in slumber.
Perhaps a more original form of the word may be found in Sw. dial. dala, dalla, to fall, to sink down; solen dalar, the sun is sinking; dala å, to be weary, drowsy; Dan. dale, to sink, to wane, to abate, become calm. Du. daalen, to go down. Pl.D. daal, Fris. dalewert, Pol. na dol, down, downwards; from Pl.D. daal, G. thal, low ground, valley.
Dark. AS. deorc. The particles so and do in Gael, are equivalent to ευ and δυ in Gr., as in συν, good, and δυν, bad. In similar relation to each other stand sorcha, light, and dorch, dorcha, dark. The element common to the two would appear to be the notion of seeing, which, however, we are unable to trace in the form of the words. See Dear, Dole.
Darling. AS. deorling, dyrling, a dim. from deor, dear.
To Darn. Now understood of mending clothes in a particular manner by interlacing stitches, but it must originally have signified to patch in general.' OFr. darne, a slice, a broad and thin piece of.—Cot. Bret. darn, a piece, fragment. The primary meaning may probably be a handful. W. dwrn, a fist, dyrnaid, a handful; Gael. dòrn, a fist, handle, short cut, or piece of anything; dòrlach, a handful; dornan, a small bundle, handful of anything.
Darnel. A weed in corn, supposed to induce intoxication, and thence called lolium temulentum in botanical Lat., and ivraie in Fr., from ivre, drunk. Rouchi darjelle. The meaning of the word is explained by the Lith. durnas, foolish, crazy, mad, whence durnes, durnei, durnzole (as Du. malkruyd from mal, foolish, mad), hyoscyamus, herba insaniam et soporem inducens.—Kil. The names of plants in early times were very unsettled. Wall. darnise, daurnise, tipsy, stunned, giddy.—Grandg. Sw. dåre, a madman, fool; dår-reta, darnel.
Darnock. — Dannock. Hedgers' gloves.—Forby. ON. dornikur, dorningar, stiff boots for wading in the water. I cite this word from the singularity of a Gaelic derivation, as we should so little expect a convenience of this kind to have been adopted from a people in the condition of the Celts.
Gael. dornag, a glove, gauntlet; from dòrn, fist; Manx dornaig, a covering for the hand or fist, used to guard the hand against thorns.—Cregeen.
Darraign. It has been shown under arraign that rationes was used in the Lat. of the middle ages for a legal account of one's actions, whence derationare, Fr. desrener, to darraign, was to clear the legal account, to answer an accusation, to settle a controversy. From the arena of the forum the term was transferred to that of arms, as was natural when the ordeal by battle was considered a reasonable method of ascertaining a question of fact.
Two harneis had he dight Both suffisant and mete to darreine The bataile in the felde betwixt hem tweine.
Chaucer.
Here the meaning is not to array the battle, to set it in order, but to fight it out, to let the battle decide the question between them.
As for my sustir Emelie— Ye wote yourself she may not weddin two At onys And therefore I you put in this degré That eache of you shall have his destiné As him is shape.—And this day fifty wekis far ne more

Everich of you shall bring a hundrid knyghts Armd for the listis upon alle rights All redy to darrein here by bataile.
Knight's Tale, 1855.
That is to say, all ready to debate or settle the question as to her possession by battle. Afterwards undoubtedly the sense was transferred from the debate or actual settlement of a combat to the preparation for it, arraying, setting the troops in order for battle.

And in the towns as they do march along Proclaims him king, and many fly to him ; Darraign your battle, for they are at hand.
H. VI. in Q.
Dart. Fr. dard, a dart. Bret. tarz, a crack, clap, violent blow with noise ; tarz kurun, a clap of thunder ; tarza, sortir avec effort et fracture, to break, crack, burst forth, dart, to appear as the dawn. W. tarddu, to spring forth or appear as the dawn. To dart would thus be to hurl as a thunderbolt, to drive forth as by an explosion.
To Dash. An imitation of the sound of a blow, the beating of waves upon the shore, &c.
Hark, hark, the waters fall, And with a murmuring sound Dash! Dash! upon the ground.
To gentle slumbers call.—Dryden in Todd.
Bav. dossen, to sound as thick hail, rain, rushing brooks. Mit lautem knall und doss. — H. Sachs. Fone manigero wazzero dozze, from the sound of many waters.—Notker in Schm. Sc. dusche, to fall with a noise, a fall, stroke, blow ; Dan. daske, to slap. Sw. daska, to drub ; Hanov. dasken, to thrash.—Brem. Wtb.
To dash is figuratively applied to feelings analogous to those produced by a sudden blow, or loud crash, to overwhelm, confound, put out of countenance.
Dastard. The termination ard is the Du. aerd, indoles, natura, ingenium, G. art, nature, kind, quality. The meaning of the radical part of the word seems that which is seen in the figurative application of dash or daze, to stun, confound, frighten.—Hunter. Dastard, étourdi—Palsgr. in Way ; a simpleton—Hal. ; a person of a tame, submissive nature. Bav. dasig, dausig, dastig, quelled, submissive, tame. AS. adastrigan, to discourage, dismay. Compare the G. niederschlagen, to knock down, and figuratively to deject, dishearten, discourage, cast down ; niedergeschlagen, sorrowful, afflicted, dispirited.—Küttn.
ON. dust, a blow. Fris. dust-slek, dusslek, a stunning blow. Sc. doyst, a sudden fall attended with noise.—Jam.
A dowse on the chops belongs to the same imitative root.
Date. Lat. datum, that which is given, assigned, fixed. 'Datum written at the foot of a letter declares the place and time at which the letter was written or given (data).'—Facciolati.
Daughter. G. tochter; Gr. θvγáτηρ ; Sanscr. duhitri; Lith. duktere; Armen. dustr; Bohem. dcera; Gael. dear; Finn. tyttär; Lap. daktar.
To Daunt. Fr. dompter, donter, to tame, reclaim, break, daunt, subdue. Dompte-venin, Celandine, from being considered an antidote. Sc. dant, danton, to subdue ; a horse-danter, a horse-breaker. From a Lat. domito, frequentative of domo, to subdue.
Daw. A bird of the crow kind. Swiss dähi, däfi; Bav. dahel; It. taccola, from taccolare, to prate, where the syllable tac represents a single element of the chattering sound, as chat in chit-chat, chatter, kat in Malay kata-kata, discourse, tat in tattle, kak in Fr. caqueter. Birds of this kind are commonly named from their chattering cry. See Chaff, Chough, Chat.
To Dawb. From dabble, to work in wet materials. Hence daub, clay ; dauber, a builder of walls with clay or mud mixed with straw, a plaisterer.—Hal. Dawber, or cleyman ; dawbyn, lino, muro.—Pr. Pm. In this sense the term is used in the Bible where it speaks of 'daubing with untempered mortar.' 'The wall is gone, and the daubers are away.'—Bible 1551, in R. Lang. tapis, torchis, clay for building ; Sp. tapia, mud wall ; tapiador, a builder of such, dawber. Lang. tap, tape, plastic clay.
To Dawdle. We have seen that Sc. daddle or daidle is used in the sense of dabbling and of walking unsteadily like a child, and thence perhaps it is applied to doing anything ill in a slovenly way. Meat is said to be daidled when improperly cooked ; clothes, when ill washed. From doing a thing awkwardly or imperfectly to doing it slowly is an easy step. Sc. daddle, daidle, to be slow in motion or action ; to daddle, dadle, daudle, to trifle, move lazily, be listless.—Atkinson. Hesse daideln, to loiter ; Pl.D. dädeln, to be slow, not to get on with a thing.—Schütze.
Dawn. ON. dagan, dögun, dawn ; dagur, day. AS. dagian, to dawn, or become day ; dagung, dawning.
Day.—Daysman.—Diet. Lat. dies.

Daze. G. tag, day. In the judicial language of the middle ages the word day was specially applied to the day appointed for hearing a cause, or for the meeting of an assembly. Du. daghen, to appoint a day for a certain purpose; daghen veur recht, to call one before a court of justice; daghinge, daeghsel, dagh-brief, libellus, dica, citatio; dagh-vaerd, an appointment of a certain day, and thence dagh-vaerd, lands-dagh, Mid. Lat. dieta (from dies), the diet, or assembly of the people. Diet was also used in E. for an appointed day. 'But it were much better that those who have not taken the benefit of our indemnity within the diet prefixed should be obliged to render upon mercy.'—Letter of K. William, 1692.
OSw. dag, the time appointed for a convention, and hence the assembly itself.—Ihre. Sc. days of law, law-days, the sessions of a court of justice. 'I send this by Betoun quha gais to ane day of law of the Laird of Balfouris.'—Jam. OE. daysman, an arbiter, the judge appointed to decide between parties at a judicial hearing.
To Daze.—Dazzle.—Dizzy.—Doze. To daze is to stun, stupify with a blow, excess of light, fear, cold, &c. The frequentative dazzle is used only of the sense of sight. To dawsel, to stupify; dazzled, stupid, heavy.—Hal.; dawzy, dawzy-headed, dizzy, as if confused, bewildered, thoughtless.—Forby. To dosen, dozen, to stupify, benumb, become torpid.—Jam.
He saw be led fra the fechting Schir Philip the Mowbray, the wicht, That had been dosnyt into the fycht— Quhen in myd causey war thai Schir Philip of his desynes
Ourcome. Barbour.
Dizzy, stunned, giddy. The origin is the sound of a heavy blow represented by the syllable doss, doyce, douss, doz. Dôz, fragor, doza, mugitus.—Gl. in Schmel. G. getöse, noise. See Dash, Dastard.
Du. daesen, to lose one's wits in madness or fright; daes, dwaes, foolish, mad; duysigh, deusigh, stunned, fainting, stupified, dizzy, astonished.—Kil. ON. das, dos, a faint, exhaustion; hann liggr i dôsi, he lies in a faint; dæsa, to fatigue. Bav. dos-öret, hard of hearing; dosen, to keep still, either in listening, reflecting, or slumbering; dusen, to be still, to slumber, be dizzy.—Schm. Pl.D. dôsig, dusig, dizzy, tired, stupid; dussen, bedussen, to faint, to be stunned; dussen, to slumber, to doze.—Brem. Wtb.
De-. Lat. de, from, out of. In comp. it strengthens the signification, implies motion downwards.
Deacon. Lat. diaconus. Gr. διάκονος, a servant.
Dead.—Death.—Die. Goth. dauths, ON. dauðr, Fris. dad, Sw. död, Pl.D. dood, G. todt, dead. Goth. dauthus, ON. dauði, Fris. duss, dad, death. Lap. taud, ill-ness; Esthon. taud, illness, death.
Pl.D. doe for dode, a dead body; doen-wake, a corpse-wake. Wall. touwî, Fr. tuer, Sw. döda, Pl.D. döden, to kill; ON. deya, OSw. döja, Sw. dö, Dan. döe, OHG. douwen, douen, touwen, to die. We must thus consider die a derivative from dead, and not vice versâ.
The primitive meaning of the active verb seems, to oppress, subdue. Bav. töten, to crack a flea, a nut, smother a fire; Sardin. studai, Lang. tuda, atuda, to extinguish; Prov. tudar, to extinguish, suffocate, choke; Fr. tuer la chandelle, to put out the candle; Pl.D. doen, to overwhelm; he wall me doen mit good daden, he will overwhelm me with bene-fits. Sw. döda sina lustar, to subdue one's passions; —värken, to allay the pain; also to obliterate, annul. Du. doodet in u de boosheit—mortifiez en vous la malice.—Halma. It. tutare, attutare, to appease, assuage, to whist; stutare, to quench, put out; attutare, to smother.—Fl. ON. döði, languor.
I find it so impossible to draw a 'distinct line of separation either in form or meaning between dead and deaf, that it will be convenient to treat of the primary origin of both in the next article.
Deaf. The meaning of the Goth. daubs, daufs, G. taub, E. deaf, seems founded in the notion of stopping an orifice. In John xvi. 6, gadaubida is found as the translation of implevit. 'Sorrow hath filled your heart.' From the notion of stopping up we readily pass to those of confining, preventing action, dulling, stupifying. Goth. gadaubjan, to harden, make insensible. The E. stop is applied to eyes, ears, and mouth, and in like manner the Goth. daubs, daufs, ON. daufr, Du. doof, G. taub, are said of different kinds of dulled or vitiated action. Goth. afdobnan, to have the mouth stopped, to be dumb; ON. daufr, deaf, dull of hearing, dull of colour, dull in spirit; Sc. dowf, dull, flat, gloomy, inactive, lethargic, hollow (in sound), silly; doof, dowfart, a dull, inactive fellow—Jam. ON. dofi, torpor, ignavia, dofna, to fade, lose strength or life; Dan. doven, sluggish, flat, stale, vapid; Sc. daw, a sluggard, E. to daff, to daw, to daunt; daff, a das-tard, a fool, daft, stupid, foolish, daffled, in one's dotage, to daver, to stun, stupify, droop, fade—Hal.; to dover, to slumber; dowerit, drowsy.—Jam. Du. doof, doove, what has lost its proper life and vigour; doof van sinnen, mad; doove verwe, a dull colour, doove netel, a dead nettle, without the power of stinging, as E. deaf nut, an empty nut; Du. doof-hout, rotten wood.

Here we are brought to the equivalence of dead and deaf above alluded to, and we are tempted to regard them as modifications of each other, as It. codardo, Ptg. cobarde, covarde, a coward. The Du. has doode or doove netel; doode or doove kole, an extinct coal; doode or doove verwe, a dull colour; ON. dodinn, Dan. doven, languid; ON. dodaskapr, Dan. dovenskab, languor. ON. daufjord, Norweg. dödlende, boggy, barren land. Du. dooden (Kil.), E. dial. dove, to thaw.—Hal. We may compare the Sw. doda, to subdue, allay, annul. It. tutare, to allay, Lang. tuda, to extinguish, with Sw. dofwa, to deafen, dull, assuage, stupify, Dan. dove, to deafen, deaden, blunt; E. deave, to stupify, dave, to assuage.—Hal. Bav. dauben, to subdue, allay; Pl.D. doven, doven, to damp, subdue, suffocate; Du. dooven, uitdooven, to put out, extinguish.

The notion of stopping up, thrusting a stopper into an orifice, leads in the most natural manner to that of stopping the breath, choking, strangling, killing.

Du. douwen, duwen, to thrust, to stuff; iets in een hoek douwen, to stick something into a corner—Halma; Pl.D. duwen, douen, to press, depress; Bohem. dawiti, to strangle, choke, kill; daw, pressure, crowd; Russ. dawit, dawowat, to press, crowd, suffocate, strangle, oppress; Serv. dawiti (würgen), to slaughter. Thus we come round to the Wall. touwi, which is used in like manner for the slaughtering a beast. Goth. divans, mortal; OHG. douuen, touuen, to die.

In order to trace dead and deaf to a common origin we must suppose that the former also is derived from the notion of stopping up, and we should find a satisfactory root in the Fris. dodd, dadde, a lump, bunch.—Outzen. Een dod, a plug of cotton in one's ear.—Overyssel Almanach. Pl.D. dutte, a plug, a tap; ON. ditta, E. dial. dit, to stop. See Dam.

Deal. I. A portion. Goth. dails, G. theil, Lith. dalis, Pol. dola, Bohem. dil, Gael. dála, Sanscr. dala, a part, lot, por-tion. Sanscr. dal, to split.

To deal is to give to each his lot, hence to traffic or have intercourse with others.

2. The wood of the fir-tree, in some parts of England called deal-tree. Swiss dähle, fir. ON. thöll, fir-tree, Scotch fir. Sw. tall, pine-tree; tall-ved, fir-wood, deal. Possibly from being easily cut and worked. ON. tálga, to hew, talgu-knifr, a knife for cutting wood; Dan. tælge, tælle, to cut, whittle; G. teller, a trencher, plate on which meat is cut. It. tagliare, Fr. tailler, to cut; Lith. dalgis, Fr. dalle, a scythe; Lat. dolare, to hew, dolabra, an axe; ON. telgia, an axe. G. diele, a board.

Dean. Fr. doyen, Du. deken, the head of a collegiate body, from Lat. decanus; ten being used in Lat. as an indefinite number, as seven in Hebrew.

Dear. Formed in the same way as dark by composition with the Gael. negative particle do = Gr. δυσ, opposed to so = Gr. εὐ. Gael. daor, bound, enslaved, precious, dear in price; saor, free, ransomed, cheap; gu daor, dearly; gu saor, freely, cheaply. Ir. daor, guilty, condemned, captive, saor, free, saoradh, ransoming, acquittal, cheapness. Manx deyr, deyree, condemn, deyrey, condemning, dear; seyr, free, clear, at liberty, seyr'ee, to free, to justify.

Death. See Dead.

To Deave. To stupify with noise. N. dyvja, to hum, buzz, sound hollow. Dæ dyvefyre oyraa, it sings in my ears.

Debate. Fr. debattre, to contend, to fight a thing out. See Beat.

Debauch. OFr. desbauche, disorder, riot, dissoluteness; desbaucher, to seduce, mislead, bring to disorder, draw from goodness. Il se desbauche, he digresses, flies out, goes from the purpose.—Cot.

The radical sense of the verb seems to be to throw out of course, from bauche, s. row, rank, or course of stones or bricks in building.—Cot. It is probable that bauche itself is a derivative from bauc, bauch, bau (Cot.), a balk or beam, through the intervention of the verb baucher, to hew or square timber (to make into a balk), also to rank, order, array, lay evenly.—Cot. Esbaucher, to rough-hew (to cut into a balk), grossly to form, square, or cut out of the whole piece, to begin rudely any piece of work, also to prune a tree.—Cot. Bau, in the Walloon of Namur, is applied to the bole of a tree felled and stripped of its branches.—Sigart. See Balk.

Debenture. See Debt.
Debility. Lat. debilis, weak.
Debonnair. Fr. debonnaire, court-eous, affable, of a friendly conversation.—Cot. It. bonario, debonaire, upright, honest.—Fl. ' La donna ridendo e di buona aria.'—Boccac. ' Il di bon aire buon signore nostro.'—Rayn. The word was early explained as a metaphor from hawking; de bon aire, from a good stock; aire, an eyry or nest of hawks. ' Oiseau debonnaire de luy-mesme se fait : the gentle hawk mans herself.'—Cot. ' Haukes of nobuiie eire.'—Sir Degrevant. But in truth the sense of a nest of hawks was only a special application of aire, signifying in the first instance air, then country, birthplace, family, race, character, disposition, as clearly appears in the quotations of Raynouard.
Ab l'alen tir vas me l'aire Qu'ieu sen venir de Proensa:—with my breath I draw towards me the air which I feel comes from Provence.
L'amors, don ieu sui mostraire, Nasquet en un gentil aire:—the love of which I am the messenger was born in a gentle home.
Tout mon linh e mon aire Vei revenir e retraire Al vesoig et a l'araire:—all my lineage and my family I see return to the spade and the plough.
Qu'el mon non es Crestias de nul aire Que sieus liges o dels parens no fos:—that there is not in the world a Christian of any family who is not his liege or of his parents.
Li baron de mal aire Que tot jorn fan Lo mal:—the barons of bad nature who always do evil.
Li sant viron lo luoc Que es asaz de bon ayre A servir Jesus Christ:—the saints saw the place, which is sufficiently well fitted for the service of J. C.
Kar estes fel e de put aire:—for you are wicked and of foul disposition.
Debt.—Debit. Lat. debeo, debitum, to owe. See Debt.
Deca-.—Decade.—Decimal. Gr. δέκα, Lat. decem, ten.
To Decant. To cant a vessel is to tilt it up on one side so as to rest on the other edge, and to decant is to pour off the liquid from a vessel by thus tilting it on the edge, so as not to disturb the grounds. Sp. canto, edge; decantar, to turn anything from a right line, to give it an oblique direction; to draw off liquors gently by inclination.—Neum.
To Decay. Prov. descazer, descaier, Fr. dechóir, to fall away, go to ruin, from Lat. cadere, to fall. OFr. dechaiable, perishable.
Decease. Lat. decessus, departure. See Cede.
December. Lat. decem, ten; December, the name of the tenth month from March, with which Romulus made the year to begin.
Decent. Lat. decens, fitting, becoming.
To Decide. Lat. decido, -sum, to cut off, cut down, and fig. to bring to an end, come to a settlement, to determine. See -cide.
To Deck. To cover, spread over, ornament. Lat. tegere, tectum, OHG. dakjan, dekjan, ON. thekja, AS. theccan, to cover, to roof. From the last of these is E. thatch, properly, like G. dach, signifying simply roof, but with us applied to straw for roofing, showing the universal practice of the country in that respect. The Lat. has tegula, a tile, from the same root, showing the use of these as roofing materials in Italy at a very early period. Lith. dengti, to cover; stala dengti, to spread the table; stoga dengti, to cover a roof.
Declare. Lat. declarare, to make clear, proclaim. See Clear.
Decoy. Properly duck-coy, as pronounced by those who are familiar with the thing itself. ' Decoys, vulgarly duck-coys'—Sketch of the Fens in Gardeners' Chron. 1849. Piscinas hasce cum allectatricibus et reliquo suo apparatu decoys seu duck-coys vocant; allectatrices coy-ducks.—Raii et Will. Ornith. Du. koye, cavea, septum, locus in quo greges stabnlantur.—Kil. Kooi, kouw, kevi, a cage; vogel-kooi, a bird-cage, decoy, apparatus for entrapping water-fowl. E. dial. coy, a decoy for ducks, a coop for lobsters.—Forby. The name was probably imported with the thing itself from Holland to the fens.
Decree. Fr. decret, from Lat. decerno, decretum, to judge, decide, decree. See -cern.
Decrepit. Lat. decrepitus, very old, worn out, infirm. Der. uncertain.
Deed. Goth. déd, gadéd, AS. dæd, G. that, a thing done. See Do.
Deem. See Doom.
Deep. See Dip.

Deer. Goth. diurs, OHG. tior, ON. dyr, G. thier, a beast, animal. In E. deer confined to animals of the cervine tribe. Diefenbach considers it quite unconnected with Gr. θήρ, Lat. fera.
Defeat. Fr. défaite, from défaire, to undo, destroy, discomfit.
Defile. Lat. filum, Fr. fil, thread; whence défiler, to go in a string one after another, and defile, a narrow gorge which can only be passed in such a manner.
To Defile, AS. fylan, Du. vuylen, to make foul or filthy. See Foul.
To Defray. Fr. défrayer, to discharge frais or expenses of anything. Formed in a manner analogous to the It. pagare, to pay, from Lat. pacare, to appease. So from G. friede, peace, friede-brief, a letter of acquittance, and Mid. Lat. fredum, freda, fridus, mulcta, compositio qua fisco exsoluta reus pacem a principe ex-sequitur.—Duc. 'Affirmavit compositi-onem sibi debitam quam illi fredum vo-cant a se fuisse reis indultam.' The term was then applied to any exaction, and so to expenses in general, whence Fr. frais, the costs of a suit.—Carpentier. Quod pro solvendis et aquitandis debitis et fredis villas suæ possent talliare, &c.—Duc.
Deft.—Deff. Neat, skilful, trim.—Hal. AS. dæfe, dafte, gedefe, fit, conve-nient; gedafan, gedafnian, to become, behove, befit; gedæftan, to do a thing in time, take the opportunity, to be fit, ready. The notion of what is fit or suitable, as shown under Beseem, Beteem, is com-monly expressed by the verb to fall or happen—what happens or falls in with one's wishes or requirements. So from Goth. gatiman, to happen, G. ziemen, to befit; from fallen, to fall, gefallen, to please, and to fall itself was formerly used in the sense of becoming, being suitable. In like manner from Goth. ga-daban, to happen, gadobs, gadofs, be-coming. From the same root Bohem. doba, time (as time itself from gatiman, to happen); Pol. podobac, to please one; Bohem. dobry, good (primarily oppor-tune), dobreliky, agreeable; Lap. taibet, debere, opportere; taibek, just, due; tai-hetet, to appropriate, to assign to one. The Lat. debeo is probably the same word, and is fundamentally to be ex-plained as signifying 'it falls to me to do so and so.'
To Defy. Fr. défier. It. disfidare, to renounce a state of confidence or peace, and let your enemy know that he is to ex-pect the worst from you. Hence to chal-lenge, to offer combat.
Degree. Fr. degré, OFr. degrat, from Lat. gradus, a step.
Deign.—Dignity.—Disdain. Lat. dignus, becoming, fit, worth, worthy; digno, to deem worthy; dignor. It. degnarsi, Fr. déigner, to deign, to deem worthy of oneself.
Deity.—Deist. Lat. Deus, God.
Delay. Fr. délai, from Lat. differre, dilatum, to defer, put off, protract; dilatio, delay; It. dilazione, delay; dilajare, OFr. delayer, to delay.
Delectable. Lat. delecto, to allure, delight. See Delicious.
Delegate. Lat. delegare, to give in charge to. See Allege.
Delete.—Deleterious.—Deleble. Gr. δηλέομαι, to destroy, to waste, to do mis-chief; δηλήτηρ, a destroyer; Mod.Gr. δηλητήριον, injury, hurt; δηλητήριος, hurt-ful. Lat. deleo, deletum, to wipe out, erase, bring to nought.
To Deliberate. Lat. deliberare, to weigh in the mind, from librare, to swing, to weigh.
Delicate. Lat. delicatus, over-nice, dainty, effeminate, tender, soft, gentle, agreeable, delightful. Perhaps a figure from the nicety of those who could not drink their wine without straining it. Deliquare, to decant, strain, clarify; liquo, to strain, purify. But more likely from the source indicated under Delicious.
Delicious.—Delight. Lat. deliciæ, de-light, pleasure, enjoyment. The gratifi-cation of the appetite for food is the most direct and universal of all pleasures, and therefore the one most likely to be taken as the type of delight in general. Thus the negro expresses his admiration of beads by rubbing his belly. The astonishment and delight of these people at the display of our beads was great, and was expressed by laughter and a general rubbing of their bellies. — Petherick, Egypt and Central Africa, p. 448. It is probable then that deliciæ may originally have had the sense of G. lecker-bissen, appetising morsels, something to lick one's chops at; and it will be observed that a reference to the enjoyment of the palate is still the prevailing sense in E. delicious and delicacy. The idea of pleasure in eating, of ap-preciating the taste of food, is constantly expressed by a representation of the sound made in smacking the tongue. The E. smack is used to signify a sounding blow with the open hand, a loud kiss, and the taste of food. G. geschmack, taste; schmecken, to taste well; schmecker (in huntsman's language), the tongue. In the Finnish languages which reject the initial s we have Fin. maku, Esthonian maggo, taste; Fin. makia, Esthon. maggus, agreeable to the taste, sweet; Fin. maskia, maiskia, to smack the lips; maiskis, a smack with the lips, a kiss, delicacies, tid-bits. Bohem. mlask, a smack, a kiss; mlaskati, to smack or make a noise with the lips in eating, to be nice in eating; mlaskanina, delicacies. In the same language the sound of a smack is represented with an initial tl as well as ml, in tleskati, to clap the hands; tlaskati, to smack in eating. With these last must be compared E. tlick, used by Cotgrave in rendering Fr. niquet, 'a knicke, tlicke, snap with the fingers.' Thence we pass to E. click, a snap or slight smack; W. clec, a smack; gwefusglec, a smack with the lips, a loud kiss; Fr. claquer de la langue, to smack the tongue with relish.
From the form click may be explained Gr. γλυκύς, sweet, pleasing to the taste, and probably γλίχομαι, to desire eagerly, originally, like Lat. ligurio, signifying to lick one's chops at. In the same way from tlick or dlick would spring Lat. dulcis, for dlucis (the identity of which with γλυκύς has long been recognized), as well as deliciæ, delicatus, delectare, for dliciæ, dlicatus, dlectare. The same root would have given dlingere for lingere, to lick, and dlingua for lingua, the tongue, explaining the double form of the old Lat. dingua and ordinary lingua by the falling away in the one case of the liquid and in the other of the mute of the original root.
When the combination tl, dl became unpleasing to the Latin ear (although preserved in stloppus, a smack), the obnoxious sound was avoided by transposition of the vowel in the case of dulcis, and by the insertion of an e in deliciæ, delecto. The intrusive vowel must doubtless in the first instance have been short, and may have been lengthened by a feeling as if the words were compounds of the preposition de.
Delinquent. Lat. linquo, to leave, let alone, omit; delinquo, to omit something one ought to do, to do wrong.
Delirious. Lat. lira, a ridge, furrow. Hence delirare (originally to go out of the furrow), to deviate from a straight line, to be crazy, deranged, to rave.
To Deliver. Lat. liber, free, whence liberare, to free, and E. deliver, to free from. Then as abandon, from signifying to put under the complete command of another, comes to signify giving up one's own claim, conversely the Fr. livrer and E. deliver, from the sense of freeing from one's own claims, passes on to that of giving up to the control of another.
The sense of OFr. delivre, E. deliver, active, nimble, is probably from the notion of free, unencumbered action.
Dell. See Dale.
Deluge.—Diluvial. Lat. lavo, latum, to wash; diluo, to wash away; diluvium, Prov. diluvi, OFr. deluve, Fr. deluge, an inundation.
To Delve. AS. delfan, to dig. Du. delven, dolven, to dig, to bury. Du. delle, a valley, hollow, lake—Kil.; Fris. dollen, dolljen, to dig, to make a pit or hollow.
To Demean. To wield, to manage; demeanour, behaviour.
So is it not a great mischance To let a foole have governaunce Of things that he can not demaine.—Chaucer in R.
His herte was nothing in his owne demain.—Ibid.
OFr. se demainer, demener, se comporter, se gouverner, se remuer, se conduire.— Roquef. Mener, to conduct, lead, manage, handle; —les mains, to lay about one; —la loi, to proceed in a suit—Cot.; It. menare, to guide, conduct, direct, or bring by the hand, to bestir.—Fl.
The later Lat. had minare, to drive cattle, derived by Diez from minari, to threaten; 'asinos et equum sarcinis onerant et minantes baculis exigunt.'—Apuleius. 'Agasones equos agentes, i. e. minantes.'—Paulus ex Festo. Walach. miná, to drive cattle, to conduct a business. But the notion of threatening seems a point of view from which the act of driving beasts would not be likely to be named. On the other hand, the OFr. spelling mainer suggests an obvious derivation from Lat. manus, Fr. main, the hand, as we speak of handing one downstairs; and mener is often synonymous with manage, which is undoubtedly from that source. Observe the frequent references to the hand in the explanations from Cotgrave and Florio above given. The same change of vowel is seen in Fr. menottes, handcuffs.
Demesne. — Domain. Mid. Lat. dominium (dominus, lord), OFr. domaine, demaine, demaigne, demesne, lordship, dominion. Demesne or demain in E. law language was appropriated to the manor-house and the lands held therewith in the immediate possession of the lord.
Demijohn. In Egypt and the Levant a carboy or large glass bottle is called damagan (Marsh), damasjan (Niebuhr). Imported into the West the name was strangely corrupted into Fr. dame-jeanne, Lang. damo-xano (a large glass bottle covered with matting—Dict. Castr.), and E. demijohn.
Demise. Fr. desmettre, -mis, to lay down, let go; se desmettre d'une office, to give over an office.—Cot. The demise of the crown is when it passes to a new possessor. See -mit.
Democracy. Gr. δημοκρατία; δῆμος, the people collectively, and κρατέω, to bear rule.
Demolish. Lat. molior, to labour at, build up; demolior, Fr. démolir, to pull down, destroy.
Demon. Gr. δαίμων, the divinity, the tutelary genius of a city or man. The Lat. dæmon was used in the latter sense, and by ecclesiastical writers was applied to the fallen angels.
To Demur. Lat. demorari, to delay, restrain; Fr. demeurer, to stay; in Law language applied to the stoppage of a suit by the preliminary objection that the plaintiff on his own showing is not entitled to the relief which he claims. Hence to demur to a proposition, to make objections.
Demure. Demure or sober of countenance, rassis.—Palsgr. Perhaps from Fr. meure (Lat. maturus), ripe, also discreet, considerate, advised, settled, staid (Cot.), through such an expression as de meure conduite, or the like. On the other hand, it may be de mœurs elliptically for de bons mœurs.
Li quens de Flandres Baudoin, Bon chevalers e genz meschins, E sage e proz, de bone murs. Benoit. Chron. des D. de Norm. 2. p. 471.
Den. The hollow lair of a wild beast; a narrow valley. AS. dene, a valley. See Dimble.
Denizen. Commonly explained as a foreigner enfranchised by the king's charter, one who receives the privilege of a native ex donatione regis, from the OFr. donaison, donison, a gift. But the general meaning of the word is simply one domiciled in a place. A denizen of the skies is an inhabitant of the skies. In the Liber Albus of the City of London the Fr. deinzein, the original of the E. word, is constantly opposed to forein, applied to traders within and without the privileges of the city franchise respectively.
'Et fait assavoire qe ceste ordinance se estent auxibien as foreyns come as denzeins de touz maneres de tieulx bargayns faitz dedeinz la dite fraunchise,' p. 370.
'Item qe nulle pulletier deinzein—ne veignent pur achatier nulle manere de pulletrie de nulle forein pulletere,' p. 465.
'Qe chescun qavera louwe ascuns terres ou tenementz de deinzein ou de forein deinz la fraunchise de la citee,' p. 448.
The correlatives are rendered in Lat. by the terms intrinsecus and forinsecus; 'mercatoris forinseci seu intrinseci,' p. 252; and as forinsecus and forein are from Lat. foras, Fr. fors, without, while the meaning of intrinsecus is simply one who is within, so deinzein is from the old form deinz, in which the modern dans, in, within, always appears in the Liber Albus. Deins né, né dans le pays.—Roquef. In the same way from hors, without, the Norman patois makes horzain, a foreigner, one from a different commune.—Pat. de Bray.
Dense. -dense. Lat. densus, thick, close-set.
Dental.—Dentition.—Dentifrice. Lat. dens, dentis, a tooth; dentitio, the act of teething; dentifricium (dens, and frico, to rub), anything to rub the teeth with. Sanscr. dantas, w. dant, tooth.
Deny. Lat. denego, Fr. denier, to say no to. See Negation.
Deplore. Lat. ploro, I wail, cry aloud.
Deploy. Fr. desployer, desplier, to unfold, lay open.—Cot. See Ply.
Depot.—Deposit. Fr. dépôt, formerly depost, a deposit or place of deposit. Lat. depono, depositum, to lay down. See -pon-.
Deprave. Lat. pravus, bad, vicious.
Depredation. Lat. deprædatio, a plundering, pillaging. See Prey.
Derive. Lat. rivus, a stream; derivo, to drain or convey water from its regular course, thence to turn aside, divert, deduce.
Dery.—Dere. To hurt. Gael. deire, end, rear, hindmost part; deireannach (Fr. dernier), last, hindmost; deireas, injury, loss, defect. The connection of the two ideas is seen in Bav. laz, slow, late, G. letzt, last, Bav. letzen, to delay, hinder, throw back, and G. verletzen, to injure. Compare also G. nachtheil (after-part), detriment, injury. To be behindhand in a business is to be wanting in it; w. ol, rear, hinderpart, bod yn ol, to be wanting.

To Descant. A metaphor taken from musick, where a simple air is made the subject of a composition, and a number of ornamented variations composed upon it. 'Insomuch that twenty doctors expound one text twenty different ways, as children make descant upon playne song.'—Tindal in R. Sp. discantar, to quaver on a note ; to chant, sing, recite verses, to discourse copiously.

To Descry. To make an outcry on discovering something for which one is on the watch, then simply to discover.
Desert. Lat. desero, desertum, to abandon, leave alone.
Design. Lat. designare, to mark out; whence to design, to frame in the mind, purpose, project.
Desire. Lat. desiderium, regret, desire.
Desolate. Lat. desolo, to leave alone, forsake, desert, to lay waste. See Sole.
Despair.—Desperate. Lat. spes, Fr. espoir, hope ; desespoir, absence of hope, despair. Lat. spero, to hope; despero, to be without hope.
Despatch. See Dispatch.
Despise.—Despite. OFr. despire, despisant, from Lat. despicere, to despise, as confire, from conficere.
Mult les despisent E poi valent, e poi les prisent Qui od Rou volent faire paix.
Chron. Norm. ii. 4978.
From Lat. despectus, we have Prov. despieg, despieyt; Fr. despit, contempt, despite.
Despond. Lat. spondeo, to promise solemnly, pledge, engage, and fig. to give good promise of the future; despondeo, to give up hopes, to despair.
Despot.—Despotic. Gr. δεσπότης, an absolute master, or owner; δεσποτικός, belonging to such a master, arbitrary.
Dessert. Fr. servir, to serve the table, to set on the dishes ; desservir, to take them away at the conclusion of the meal, whence dessert, G. nachtisch, the fruits and sweetmeats laid on when the dinner has been cleared away.
Destine.—Destiny. Lat. destino, to bind, make fast, and fig. to determine, design, purpose, appoint, fix, doom.
Destroy. Lat. struo, to put together, to build ; destruo, to pull down what was built.
Desultory. Lat. salio, to leap; desilio, desulto, to leap down ; desultor, in the games of the circus, one who leaps from one horse to another; fig. an inconstant person.

Detail. Fr. detailler, to piecemeal—Cot.; from tailler,—to cut. See Deal.
Deter. Lat. deterreo, to frighten from. See Terror.
Detergent. Gr. τέρσω, to dry, Lat. tergeo, tersum, as Fr. essuyer, properly to make dry, then to wipe; detergeo, to wipe off,—make clean. From the same root with Dry.
Deteriorate. Lat. deterior, worse.
Determine. Lat. terminus, a bound, limit; determino, to fix limits, to appoint, to finish.
Detriment.—Detritus. Lat. detero, -tritum, to rub off, lessen; detrimentum, a rubbing off, loss, damage.
* Deuce.—Dickens. A euphemism for the devil. The Pl.D. uses düker, duks, or duus, in the same sense ; de düks un de dood! De duus! as in English, the deuce! or the dickens! G. Ei der Daus! was der Daus! what the deuce! wie ein Daus, deuced, in an extreme degree. Swab. taus; dass dich der Taus!—Schmid.
The Düs was still known as a kind of goblin among the Frisians until late times, according to Outzen, identical with the AS. Thyrs, ON. Thuss, a goblin supposed to dwell in fens and desert places, but Deuce is probably from a wholly different quarter. The inclination to avoid the sin of profane swearing without wholly giving up the gratification has very generally led to a mangling of the terms employed so as to deprive them of any apparent reference to sacred or awful things. Thus the French say sapperment! for sacrament!, morbleu! corbleu! for Mort de Dieu! Corps de Dieu! Diantre for Diable; and in the same way the Germans seem to have taken the first syllable of the name of the devil and lengthened it arbitrarily in different ways : Tausig, Dusig, Dausi, Deixel, Dixel, Deichert, Deihenker, Teuhenker.—Deutsch. Mundart. iii. 505. Sw. dial. Diäse, the Devil.
Develop. Fr. développer. See Envelope.
Deviate.—Devious. Lat. via, way; deviare, to go out of the track, devius, out of the way. See Way.
Devil. Lat. diabolus, Gr. διάβολος, the accuser, from διαβάλλω, to calumniate, traduce.
To Devise,—Device. Lat. dividere, divisum, to divide or distribute, gave rise in the Romance languages to verbs signifying to divide, distinguish, distribute, arrange, appoint; and that, either by a purely mental operation, when the meaning will be to devise, invent, or imagine; or with the addition of oral enunciation, when the word will signify to discourse, describe, make known our views and arrangements to another.

I couth haue told you Such peinis as your hertis might agrise, Albeit so no tonge may it devise. Though that I might a thousand winter tell The peynis of that cursid house of Hell. Frere's Tale.

From dividere itself we have Prov. devire, to divide, distinguish, explain; and from the participle divisum, Prov. OFr. devis, discourse, as well as a secondary form of the verb, Prov. devizir, Fr. deviser, It. divisare, in the senses above explained, which are well illustrated in the Diz. de la Crusca.

In reference to the sense of distinguishing, a passage is quoted from Villani where it is said that the arms worn by a noble were the lilies of France, and in addition a vermillion port-cullis above— ' e tanto si divisava da quella di re de Francia ;' and so the arms were distinguished from those of the King of France. The French arms were worn with a difference. Hence It. divisa, and E. device, in the sense of a distinctive mark. This application is somewhat perplexed by a fashion prevalent in the 13th and 14th centuries, when dresses were worn with the two halves of the body of different colours, dresses so divided being called vesti alla divisa, or divisati, the colours of which served to distinguish the adherents of a particular party, house, or noble, and constituted the partita, divisa, or device of the uniform. ' Illi de Auria et Grimaldi pro ipsorum majori colligatione insimul se induerant simile vestimentum, duorum scilicet pannorum coloris diversi, ex quibus quilibet vestimentis unum habens gerebat pro dimidio colorem, et pro reliqua colorem alterum.' — Chron. Genuense. A.D. 1311 in Mur. Diss. 33. ' Calze, una (i. e. one leg) rosso di panno e l'altra alla divisa, secondo i colori dell' arme del senatore.'—Diss. 29. Divisato, particoloured.—Fl.

Thus we are sometimes in doubt whether the word has reference to the actual diversity of colour or is used in the sense of a distinctive mark. ' Pulcherrima divisa est color albus et rubeus.' —Mur.

And ere alone but when he did servise All black he wore and no devise but plain. Chaucer, Belle Dame sans merci.

A similar wavering between the shades of meaning is seen in the legal phrase of devising by will. It may be explained in the sense of dividing the property, as Ducange gives jus dividendi for the right of disposal by will. But it is better understood in the sense of arranging, expressing the will of the testator as to the disposition of his property. ' Fai ta devise e ton plaisir de ço que est en ta maison kar tu murras : ' set thy house in order?—Livre des Rois. ' Aura chascun— l'argent dessus devise'—Shall have the money above appointed.— Registre des Metiers. Docum. Inedits.

Ainz que departe ne devis A mes homes n' à mes amis Ceste terre e à ma gent. Chron. des Ducs de Norm. 6960.

Point Device. This phrase, which has been much misunderstood, may be explained from It. divisare, Fr. deviser, to plan or imagine, whence à devise used as a superlative of praise.

Un noble château à devise. Fab. et Contes, iii. 155. Li vergiers fut biau à devise.—Ib. iii. 115. The garden was fair as could be imagined, or, as we say with greater exaggeration, fair beyond imagination. ' They went down in their barges to Greenwich, and every barge as goodly drest as they could device.'—Chron. Hen. VIII. in Cam. Miscell. iv.

Ele fut portraite à devis ; N'est cuens ni rois ni amirés Qui seust deviser tant bele En nule terre come cele. Bien fu fete par grant maitrise Nature la fist à devise. Fab. et Contes, iii. 424.

She was a specimen of the beau ideal; no count, or king, or admiral, could imagine one so fair.

On the other hand, point is used in the sense of condition ; en bon point, in good condition ; mettre à point, to put into condition, to dress. A point devise then would signify, in the condition of ideal excellence, precisely the sense in which point device is always used.

So noble was he of his stature, So faire, so jolie and so fetise. With limmis wrought at point device. R. R. 830.

Devote.—Devout. Lat. voveo, votum, to vow or promise to the gods ; devoveo, devoto, to dedicate to the Deity, to appoint to a sacred purpose. Fr. devot, religious, godly, devout.

Devour. Lat. *voro*, to gulp down, eat greedily.
Dew. Du. *dauw*, G. *thau*, ON. *dögg*, Dan. *dug*, Sw. *dagg*, dew; ON. *deigr*, moist, soft; Sc. *dew*, moist. For the probable origin see Daggle. The senses of dew and thaw are confounded in G. *thauen*, Pl.D. *dauen*, to thaw, to dew. See Thaw.
Dew-berry. G. *thau-beere*.—Adelung. A kind of blackberry covered with bloom. Probably a corruption of dove-berry, from the dove-coloured bloom for which it is remarkable, as the same name is in Germany given to the bilberry, which is covered with a similar bloom. Bav. *taub-ber*, *tauben-ber* (die blaue *heidel-beere*), *vaccinium myrtillus*. *Dubbere*, *mora*.—Schmeller.
Dewlap. Dan. *dog-læp*; Du. *douw-swengel*; from sweeping the dew. Sw. dial. *dogg*, Du. *douw* (Kil.), dew; Da. *lap*, a flap.
Dexterous. — Dexterity. Sanscr. *daksha*, Gr. *δεξιά*, *δεξιτερὰ*, Lat. *dextera*, the right hand.
Dey. See Dairy.
Dia-. Gr. *διά*, through; in comp. through, thorough, and also between, apart, asunder.
Diabolic. See Devil.
Diadem. Gr. *διάδημα*, the white fillet with which kings used to bind their heads; *διαδέω*, to bind round, fasten; *δέω*, to bind.
Diagonal. Gr. *γωνία*, an angle; *διαγώνιος*, Lat. *diagonalis*, of a line drawn through the angles.
Dial. A device for showing the time of day. Lat. *dialis*, belonging to the day.
Dialect.—Dialogue. Gr. *διαλέγω*, to converse. See Logic.
Diameter. Gr. *διάμετρος*, the measure through (a circle).
Diamond. G. *demant*, corrupted from adamant.
Diaper. It. *diaspro*, a Jasper or Diasper stone.—Flor. Gr. *ἴασπις*, Lat. *Jaspis*. Then as jasper was much used in ornamenting jewellery, M.Lat. *diasprus*, an ornamented texture, *panni pretiosioris species*.—Duc. ' *Pluviale diasprum cum listis auro textis*.' ' *Duas cruces de argento, unam de diaspro, et unam de crystallo*—*duo pluvialia de diaspro et panno Barbarico*.' *Diasperatus*, adorned with inlaid work, embroidery, or the like. ' *Sandalia cum caligis de rubeo sameto diasperato, breudata cum imaginibus regum*.'

Covered with cloth of gold: diapred well.
Knight's Tale.
Fr. *diaspré*, variegated, 'versicolor instar jaspidis.'—Duc. In OE. poetry a meadow is frequently spoken of as diapered with flowers. At a later period the reference to different colours was lost, and the sense was confined to the figures with which a stuff was ornamented. Fr. *diapré*, diapered, diversified with flourishes on sundry figures.—Cot. As now understood it is applied to linen cloth, woven with a pattern of diamond-shaped figures.
Diaphanous. Gr. *διαφαίνω*, to shine through. See Phantom.
Diaphragm. Gr. *διάφραγμα*, from *διά*, inter, and *φράγμα*, a partition.
Diarrhoea. Gr. *διάρροια*, from *διά*, through, and *ῥέω*, to flow, run.
Diary.—Diurnal. Lat. *dies*, day.
Diatribe. Gr. *τρίβω*, to rub, wear; *διατρίβω*, to wear away, pass time; *διατριβή*, pastime, amusement, occupation, study, an argument.
Dibber.—Dibble. A setting-stick, usually made of the handle of a spade, cut to a point and shod with iron.—Baker.
I'll not put The dibble in the earth to set one slip of them.
Winter's Tale.
The syllable dib, expressing the act of striking with a pointed instrument, is a modification of Sc. dab, to prick, Bohem. *dubati*, to peck, E. job, to thrust, or peck, parallel with dag or dig, to strike with a pointed instrument. Norm. *diguer*, to prick; *diguet*, a pointed stick used in reaping.—Pat. de Brai.
Dibble-dabble. Rubbish.—Hal. Comp. Magy. *dib-dáb*, useless, insignificant; *dib-dábság*, useless stuff, rubbish.
-dicate. Lat. *dico*, -*atum*, to proclaim, publish, devote, appropriate; *abdico*, to renounce, abdicate; *dedico*, to inscribe, dedicate.
-dict.—Diction.—Dictate. Lat. *dico*, *dictum*, to say; *dictio*, a saying, word; *dictum*, a word, an order; *dicto*, -*atum*, to enounce, dictate, prescribe.
Didactic. Gr. *διδακτικός*, apt to teach, from *διδάσκω*, to teach.
Didapper. A water-bird constantly diving under water. Du. *doppen*, to dip. See Dabchick.
To Didder. To didder, dither, dodder, to tremble; diddering and daddering; doddering-dickies, the quivering heads of quaking grass.—Hal. ON. *dadra*, to wag the tail; Magy. *dideregni*, *dederegni*, *dödörgni*, to tremble; Sc. *diddle*, to shake, to jog.

Hale be your heart, hale be your fiddle, Long may your elbuck jink and diddle. Burns in Jam.

To doddle, to totter: Bav. tattern, to tremble. The origin is a representation of the repeated beats of a vibrating body by the syllables da, da, ta, ta, or, when the beats are rapid and small, di, di, ti, ti. Compare Galla dada-goda, to make dada, to beat.—Tutschek. Mod.Gr. ῥιζιφιζω, to shiver, shimmer ; G. zittern, to tremble.

To Diddle. Properly, as shown in the last article, to move rapidly backwards and forwards, then to use action of such a nature for the purpose of engaging the attention of an observer while a trick is played upon him, to deceive by juggling tricks.

Die.—Dice. It. dado, Prov. dat, Fr. det, dé, a die or small cube used in gaming. Arab. daddon, dadda, game of dice.

To Die. See Dead.

To Die or Dye. AS. dedh, deag, colour, dye ; deagan, to dye. Gael. dath (pronounced dā), colour, dye ; Manx daah, colour, dye, blush ; daahghey, to colour, stain, blush.

Probably the radical meaning may be to soak, wet, or steep.

Then if thine eye shed dye this sacred urn, Each drop a pearl shall turn, To adorn his tomb.—Epitaph, 1633.

E. dial, to deg, to moisten.—Hal. ON. deigr, wet ; digna, to become wet ; Dan. dygge, to sprinkle with water, dyg-vaad, dyng-vaad, thoroughly wet. In the latter of these forms we see a close agreement with Lat. tingere, which unites the senses of wetting or moistening, plunging in liquid, dyeing with colour. Gr. τέγγω, to moisten, stain, colour. See Daggle.

Diet. I. A deliberative assembly. See Day.

2. Gr. δίαιτα, mode or place of life, means of life, subsistence.

But sith I know my wordis doith thee so sore smert, Shall no more hereafter ; and eche day our diete (intercourse) Shall be mery and solase, and this shall be forgete.—Chaucer, Beryn. 700.

Difficult. Lat. difficilis, hard to be done; difficultas, difficulty. See Facile.

To Dig. To drive a pointed instrument into ; to spur a horse, stab a man through his armour.—Hal. A modification of dag. See Dagger. Norm. diguer, to prick ; endiguer, to pierce with an awl or needle ; diguet, a pointed stick, a dibble. Lith. dygus, sharp, pointed ; degti, daigyti, to stick ; dygulis, a prickle ; dyge, dygle, a stickle-back. Turk. dikmek, to sew, stitch, plant, set ; diken, a prickle.

Digest. Lat. digero, -gestum, to carry in different directions, disperse, dissolve, digest.

To Dight. To dress, adorn, prepare. AS. dihtan, to set in order, arrange, compose. G. dichten, to meditate, contrive, invent, compose. From Lat. dictare, to dictate, to speak what is to be taken down in writing. Dictare, dichten, tichten, vorsagen oder lesen das man schreibt.—Dief. Sup. Sw. dickta, to invent, to feign, to devise ; dickta upp en historia, to trump up a story. See Ditty.

Dignity.—Condign. See Deign.

Dike.—Ditch. As the earth dug out of the ground in making a trench is heaped up on the side, the ditch and the bank are constructed by the same act, and it is not surprising that the two should have been confounded under a common name. Du. dijck, agger, et fovea, alveus, fossa.—Kil. In like manner the It. mota, the mound on which a castle was built, is identical with E. moat, the surrounding ditch out of which the earth was dug. In the N. of England a dike is a dry hedge, dike stour, a hedge-stake, while dike-holl or dike-hollow is the ditch.—Hal. In Dan. the term dige is applied both to a ditch and bank, but dige-grøft is specifically the ditch.

The primary signification is doubtless that of the Fr. digue, a bank, jetty, or dam for stopping the flow of water, whence the term is applied, like the Scandinavian dam or the Romance tampo, tanco, to a pond of water held up by a dike or dam. Du. dijck, piscina, stagnum.—Kil. The two applications are in G. distinguished by a modification of spelling, and deich is used in the sense of a dike or dam, teich in that of a pond. In a similar manner in England the northern pronunciation dike has been appropriated to a bank, the southern, ditch, to a trench.

The ultimate origin of the term must be looked for, not in the idea of digging with a spade, but in that of stopping up, thrusting in a peg to stop an orifice, in accordance with the fundamental signification of the root dag or dig, whence Sp. taco, a stopper, ramrod, billiard cue, wadding ; w. tagu, to choke, to stifle. Magy. dugni, to stick in, to stop, duga, a plug, stopper, stuffing ; Illyrian tukani, Pol. tkać, to thrust, stick, cram, stuff; utykad, to stop chinks ; Bohem. zatka, a stopper, bung, obstruction. Fin. tukkia, to stop a hole, stuff something into a hole ; tuket, a stopper ; tukkuta, to be stopped, to stagnate ; Esthon. tükma, to thrust, press in, to stop ; tükkis, a stopper. Sc. dook, a peg driven into a wall.

Dilapidation. Lat. lapis, -idis, a stone ; dilapido, to destroy, perhaps by battering with stones, or perhaps to throw about like stones, to dissipate, squander, waste.
Saepe ferus duros jaculatur Jupiter imbros Grandine dilapidans hominumque boumque labores.—Columella.

Dilemma. Gr. δίλημμα, an argument equally conclusive in two opposite ways, from δις, twice, and λῆμμα, a proposition or thesis.

Diligent. Lat. diligo (properly to pick out), to love ; diligens, loving, attentive, industrious. See -lect.

Dilling.—Dill. Dilling, a darling or favourite, the youngest child or the youngest of a brood.—Hal. ON. dill, the nurse's lullaby ; dilla, to lull a child to sleep. To dill, to soothe, to still, to calm—Hal., to dill down, to subside, become still.
The noise of the Queen's journey to France has dilled down.—Jam.
Hence the name of the herb dill (Sw. dill, Dan. dild, anethum), used as a carminative or soothing medicine for children. Dan. dull, dull, still, quiet, as pain when the attack goes off ; dulme, to subside, assuage, soothe. Lith. tylus, quiet, still, tildyti, to quiet, tyla, silence ; Pol. tulić, to seek to calm, soothe, or appease one, utulić, to quiet a crying child. See Dull.

Dilly. A public carriage, contracted from Fr. diligence.—Hal.

Diluvial. See Deluge.

Dim. One of the numerous class of words branching out from the root tap, dab, dam in the sense of stop, obstruct, mentioned under Deaf and Dam. Lang. tapa lou lhour, to stop one's light ; Ptg. tapa los olhos, to cast a mist before one's eyes, taparse, to darken, become dark ; tapar os ouvidos, Lang. se tampa las aourelhos, to stop one's ears.
Bav. daumb, daum, taum, stopper, wadding ; daumen, verdaumben, to ram down, to stop ; dumper, dimper, dull in sound or in colour ; ' timper, fusca vox, cæcus Sonus,' timberriu wuolchen, the dark clouds ; ein tumperer nebel, a dark mist. Timberi, caligo—Notker, identical with Lat. tenebræ ; vertumperte augei, oculi contenebrati.—Schmeller. Swab. diemer, dumper, gloomy, of the weather ; vertumplen, vertumlen, to make thick (trübe). Du. bedampen, to darken, to make dim—Halma; een dompig huis, a close, dark house. ON. dimmr, dark, thick; dimma, dumba, darkness ; dimmleitr, dumbinn, dark-coloured ; dumbungr, thickness of air, covered weather ; dimmraddadr, voce obscura et gravi ; dimma, to grow dark. Sw. dimba, a fog, haze ; Dan. dum, dumb, dim, obscure, dull, low (of sound), stupid.
The same relation between the ideas of shutting up and darkening is seen in Manx doon, to close or shut up, and also to darken ; doon, a field or close; dooney, shutting, closing, darkening; E. dun, of a dark colour. The same development of the root is found in the Finnish languages. Fin. tumma, dull, dim, tummeta, to be dimmed, to be put out as a fire, tummentaa, to damp the fire, to extinguish ; Esthon. tumme, dull, dim, dark ; Lap. tuom, dull in action, slow.

Dimble.—Dimple.—Dingle. Dimble or dingle is a narrow glen, deep valley.
Within a gloomy dimble she doth dwell. Sad Shepherd.
Lith. dubus, hollow, deep (of vessels) ; dubus medis, a hollow tree ; dumbu, dubti, to be hollow ; dube, dobe, a ditch, hole in the earth, den ; dubele, a little pit, dimple in the cheek or chin ; dauba, a glen, cleft, valley. Fris. dobbe, a ditch, hole, pit, hollow ; dobbetjens, a dimple.—Epkema. E. dib, a valley ; dub, a deep place in a river—Hal., a puddle or gutter—Jam. ; dump, a deep hole of water ; Bav. dümpf, dümpfel, a deep hole in a river ; OHG. tumpfîlo, gurges—Schmeller ; E. dumble, a wooded dingle.—Hal.
Closely connected with deep, dip. The radical image may be the hollow made by a blow with a pointed instrument, represented by the syllable dib, whence dibber, dibble, a setting-stick. Compare Bohem. dupati, to stamp, dupa, a hollow ; Pol. dupnieć, to become hollow. On the same principle we have dent, the hollow made by a blow (and perhaps den, a cave or hollow), from dint, a blow. So also from dig or ding in the sense of stabbing or thrusting or striking with a hammer or the like, we pass to dinge, the hollow made by the blow, and dingle, synonymous with dimble, a narrow glen.

Dimension. Lat. dimetior, -mensus, to measure out. See Measure.

Dimity. Originally a stuff woven with two threads, from Gr. δις, twice, and μίτος, a thread. ' Officinas ubi in fila variis distincta coloribus Serum vellera tenuuntur, et sibi invicem multiplici texendi genere coaptantur. Hinc enim videas amita, dimitaque et trimita minori peritia sumptuque perfici, i. e. (says Muratori) 'vulgares telas sericiae uno filo seu licio, duobus, aut tribus contextae.'—Falcandus, Hist. Sicil. in Mur. Diss. 25. In the same way the G. name for velvet, sammet, is contracted from exhamita, from having been woven of six threads. In like manner G. drillich, E. drill, a web of a threefold thread; G. zwillich, E. twill, a web of a double thread.

Din. Imitative of continued sound. ON. dynia, dundi, to resound; duna, to thunder. Lat. tinnire, to sound as a bell, tonare, to thunder. See Dun.

\* To Dine. It. desinare; OFr. disgner, disner, digner; Prov. disnar, dirnar, dinar. 'Disnavi me ibi.'—Gl. Vatic. quoted by Diez. Diez suggests a derivation from a Lat. decanare (analogous to devorare, depascere), whence in Fr. might have arisen decener, desner, diner, as from decima—desme, dime. The OFr. had reciner, to lunch, from recanare.
The more probable derivation however seems to me to be that from Lat. desinere, to cease, the dinner being the meal taken at the noontide cessation from labour. The application of It. desinare to the sense of dining may have driven it out of use in the sense of ceasing.

To Ding. To strike, knock, cast. To ding through, to pierce. 'He dang him throw the body with ane swerd.'—Bellenden in Jam. To ding at the door, to knock.—P.P. ON. dengia, to hammer; dengia einum niðr, to ding one down.
The syllables ding, dong, or the like, are used in the first instance to represent a strong impression on the ear, and thence are transferred to a violent action, a heavy blow.

Dingle. A narrow valley, a glen. A variety of dimble, and, as the latter was derived from dib, expressing a blow with a pointed instrument, dingle stands in the same relation to dig, ding. The primary meaning then would be a dint, pit, hollow.

Dingy. Related to forms like the G. dumpfig, dead in sound, musty, damp, Du. dompig, dark, close, as cringe to AS. crymbig, crooked. It. cangiare to cambiare, to change. The ON. dumba, darkness, would give an AS. dymbig, darkish, dingy. It may be considered as the analogue of the Du. donker, G. dunkel, dark. See Damp, Dim.

Dint.—Dent.—Dunt. All imitative of the sound of a blow. To dunt, to strike so as to make a hollow sound, to beat, to palpitate.—Jam.
ON. dunkr, dynkr, Sw. dunk, a hollow sound, as the boom of a gun; dunka, to beat, to throb, to knock at a door; dunsa, to strike with a dull sound, to fall heavily; dunta, to strike, to shake—Rietz; Da. dial. dunte, to sound hollow under the feet; dundse, to thump.

Diocese. Gr. διοίκησις, the management of a household, administration, function of a steward, a province or jurisdiction; in ecclesiastical matters the jurisdiction of a bishop. διοικέω, to manage household affairs, from οἶκος, a house.

To Dip.—Deep. Goth. daupjan, AS. dippan, Sw. doppa, to dip, to soak. Du. doppen, doopen, to dip, baptise; Sc. doup, Du. duypen, to duck the head. G. taufen, to baptise; It. tuffare, to dive or duck, to plunge under water.
Goth. diups, ON. diupr, Du. duyp, diep, G. tief, deep. Lith. dubus, hollow, deep (of a vessel); diube, dobe, a ditch, hole in the ground, dubele, a little hole, a dimple; dumbu, dubti, to be hollow. E. dub, a pool in a river, dump, a deep hole of water. Du. dampen, dompelen, to plunge under water—Halma; Bav. dümpf, dümpfel, a deep hole in a river.
Bohem. dupa, a hole or cavern, dupati, to stamp, dubati, to peck, strike with the beak.
The original root seems to be the syllable dib, dub, representing the sound of a blow with a pointed instrument, and thence being applied to the hollow made in the object struck, or on the other hand to the sudden motion downwards with which the blow is given. To dip then is to go suddenly downwards, and deep designates the quality of things which admit of going suddenly downwards, the depth being greater as they admit of a more extended or more sudden descent.
It is remarkable that as we have a root dig in the same sense with dib, the same parallelism of the labial and guttural final is found throughout the series. We have Du. duypen and duycken, to duck the head, to duck under water, dive; Sc. doup in the same sense as the E. duck; G. taufen, to baptise, tauchen, to dip or dive; E. dimble and dingle, a glen; Du. dompen, G. tunken, to dip.

Diphthong. Gr. δίφθογγος, having a twofold sound; φθόγγος, articulate sound.

Diploma.—Diplomatic. Gr. δίπλωμα, Lat. diploma, an authoritative document, licence, charter, from διπλόω, to double, because in the form of folded tablets.
Dire. Lat. dirus, cruel, dreadful.
Dirge. A funeral service; from Ps. 5, v. 8. ' Dirige Domine Deus meus in conspectu tuo vitam meam,' repeated in the anthem used on such occasions.—Jam. The frere wol to the direge if the cors is fat. Political Songs, 332, Cam. Soc. In old Sc. dregy, dirgy.
Dirk.—Durk. A dagger. Sc. durk, G. dolch, Sw. dolk, a dagger. Bohem. tuleg, a spear (spiculum), tulich, a dagger. Magy. tolni, to thrust ; Russ. tolkat', tolknuf, to give a blow, strike, knock ; Bohem. tlauk, a pestle. Fris. dulg, dolge, dolch, a wound.—Epkema. The inter-change of an l and r before a final gut-tural is very common. Comp. Dan. dial. smilke and kilche, corresponding to E. smirk and kirk—Junge ; Outzen. OFr. pourpe for poulpe.—Roquef.
* Dirt. Dryte or doonge, merda, stercus.—Pr. Pm. To drite, cacare, egerere.—Cath. Ang. in Way. on. drit, excrement. G., Du. dreck, excrement, filth, mud, dirt. The radical sense of the word is simply a lump, what falls in separate portions. Banff, treetle, to fall in drops, to trickle. E. trattles, trolles, treadles, the dung of sheep, goats, hares, &c. Du. drotel, dreutel pilula stercoraria. Banff, turd, a clot of excrement, is radically identical with inversion of the r. In the same way E. crottles, lumpy dung, may be com-pared with crote, a clod, and Du. krotte, dirt sticking to the bottom of clothes, Fr. crotte, dirt.
Dis-, Di-, before an f, Dif-. From Gr. δίς (Sanscr. dvis, Lat. bis), twice, in two parts, separately. In composition it im-plies separation from the thing signified by the word with which it is compounded, and hence negation, opposition.
Disaster. Fr. desastre, It. disastro, an evil chance, something brought about by an evil influence of the stars. Prov. astrar, to cause by the influence of the stars ; astruc, Lat. astrosus, fortunate ; benastre, good fortune ; desastre, misfortune.—Diez.
To Discard. Sp. descartar, to throw cards out of one's hand at certain games; hence to put aside, reject.
Disciple.—Discipline. Lat. discipu-lus, disciplina, from disco, I learn.
Discomfit. Fr. disconfire, -fit, to over-throw, defeat. Lat. conficio, to bring to-gether, to make up. See -fect.
DISPENSE Discreet.—Discretion. Fr. discret, discerning, prudent ; Lat. discerno, -cre-tum, to discern ; discretio, separation, se-lection.
Discrepancy. Lat. crepo, to creak, make a noise ; discrepo, to be out of tune, sound inharmoniously, thence, to disagree.
Discriminate. Lat. discrimen, se-paration, distinction. See -cern.
Disgust. Fr. desgoust, dégoût, from Lat. gustus, taste.
Dish.—Disk. Lat. discus, a quoit or flat circle of stone, wood, or metal ; hence, a dish ; Gr. δίσκος, a quoit, a tray. G. tisch, a table.
Disheveled. Fr. descheveler, to put the hair out of order. Fr. cheveux, Lat. capillus, the hair.
Dismal. Swiss dusem, dark, thick, misty, downhearted. Bav. dus, dusam, dusig, dusmig, dull (not shining), still, cloudy. Dan. dial. dusm, dussem, slum-ber. Dasyn, or in Pynson's edition, dasmyn, or missyn as eyne, caligo.—Pr. Pm. Swab. disseln, disemen, dusemen, disinen, dusmen, to speak low, dosen, dosmen, to slumber. The primary image is a low sound, then dull in colour, dark, overcast, uncheerful.
Dismay. Sp. desmayo, a swoon, fainting-fit, decay of strength, dismay; desmayar, to faint, to be faint-hearted, to discourage, frighten. See Amaze.
To Disparage. From Lat. par, equal, arises Fr. parage, equality of birth or in blood, (and hence) kindred, parentage, lineage.—Cot. Hence to disparage, to match a person with one of inferior birth and condition, and in modern usage to speak slightingly of one, to put him lower in estimation.
Dispatch. It. impacciare, to impeach, encumber, hinder ; dispacciare, to dispatch, rid or free.—Fl. Fr. empescher, to hinder, impeach, pester ; despescher, to rid, send away quickly, discharge.—Cot. Diez would derive the words from Lat. impingere, in the sense of fastening something troublesome upon one, through the supposed frequentative forms impactare, impactiare. More probably from the Gael. bac, stop, hindrance, restraint ; bacail, obstruction. Lat. repagula, bars, restraints, fastenings. Prov. empaig, empacha, empaita, obstacle, hindrance ; empaichar, empaitar, empazar, empechar, to embarrass ; the converse of which, to dispatch, is to remove a hindrance.
Dispense.—Dispensation. Lat. dispenso, to pay out money, to manage an income; to dispense with, to manage without. See Spend.
Disperse. See -sperse.
To Display. OFr. desployer, It. dis-piegare, spiegare, to unfold, from Lat. plicare, to fold.
To Dispute. Lat. disputare, to cast up a sum, compute, to examine and dis-cuss a subject. In modern language the term is applied to hostile discussion of a subject with another person.
Disseminate. To sow here and there. Lat. semen, seed.
Dissertation. Lat. dissero, -sertum, to set asunder, to discuss; disserto, to explain, debate, discuss. See -sert.
Dissident. Lat. dissideo, to sit apart, to disagree.
Dissipate. Lat. dissipare, to scatter. The obs. sipo or supo signified to cast.—Festus.
Distaff. The staff on which the flax was fastened in spinning. Pl.D. diesse, Ditmarsh dies, the bunch of flax on the distaff; E. dial. dise, to supply the staff with flax. 'I dysyn a dystaffe.'—Palsgr.
The term may be a modification of the root appearing in Gael. dos, a bush, cluster, tuft, lock of hair, E. tussock, a tuft of grass, Bav. doschen, duschen, dosten, a bush, tuft, tassel. On the other hand, the thread drawn down from the stock of flax on the distaff may be compared to the stream of milk drawn from an animal's udder, and thus the term may be identical with the Sw. diss, a teat, dissa, to suck. We speak of blood spinning from a vein.
Distich. Gr. δίστιχος (δις, and στίχος, a row, verse), in two rows or lines.
Distinguish.—Distinction. Lat. distinguo, -nctum, properly to mark with points; Gr. στίζω, to prick; στίγμα, a prick or spot; Lat. instigo, instinguo, to prick one on, to stimulate.
Distrain.—Distress.—District. From Lat. stringere, to strain, to draw tight, Mid. Lat. distringere (whence Fr. distraindre and E. distrain) was used in the sense of exercising severity upon, correcting, and especially in that of compelling or constraining a person to do something by the exaction of a pledge or by fine or imprisonment. 'Et liceat illi eos distringere ad justitias faciendas.'—Hist. Fr. in Duc. 'Et ce qui est dessus devisé fut fait et establi pour destraindre les gens à venir faire droit en la cour.'—Assis. Hierosol. In this sense we still speak of distraining for rent, when we DIVAN seize the goods of a tenant, in order to compel him to pay the rent.
The pledge or the fine exacted was termed districtio, distress, and the same name was sometimes given to the rights of exercising judicial authority. 'Districtio quoque villæ ad ecclesiam pertinebit, ita ut Godescalcus—qui advocatus est ejusdem allodii, medietatem ipsius districtionis de Ecclesiâ teneat.'—Charta ann. 1124. But the right of exercising such authority, as well as the territory over which it was exercised, were more commonly termed districtus. It. distretto, OFr. destroict, E. district. 'Maneantque sub judicio et districtu vestro.'—Bulla Bonifacii ann. 1033. 'Qui allodium vendiderit, districtum et jurisdictionem Imperatoris vendere non præsumat.'—Lib. Feod. 'Et totum districtum ejusdem insulæ cum totâ justitiâ dedi eis.'—Charta ann. 983. 'Prædictum fumum et districtum ejusdem furni,' i. e. the soke of the oven, or right of compelling the tenants to resort to it for the purpose of baking.—Duc.
To Dit.—Ditch. To dit is to stop an orifice. 'Dit your mouth with your meat.'—Sc. proverb. AS. dittan, to stop. ON. ditta, to stop chinks. From dot, a lump, as the notion of stopping an orifice is commonly expressed by reference to the bunch of materials thrust into the opening. See Dam. Du. dodde, a tap, stopper, plug.—Kil. Dan. dial. dot, a stopper. N. dott, a bunch, a lump; dytta, to stop a hole.
Another modification of the word is ditch, or diche, to stuff or fill up. A table is diched when the dirt has insinuated itself into the grain of the wood.—Baker, Northampt. Gl. Bav. datschen, detschen, dotschen, to press down something soft; datsch, &c., a mess of something soft, kue-datsch, cow-dung.—Schm.
Ditch. See Dike.
Ditto. A term from the language of book-keeping. It. detto (Lat. dictum), said, aforesaid.
Ditty. OFr. dict, dicté, ditté, recitation of an adventure, story, poem, work of imagination.—Roquef. Lat. dicere, dictum, to say.
Then said I, thus it falleth me to cesse Eithir to rime or ditees for to make. Chaucer, Belle Dame sans merci.
Diuretic. See Urine.
Divan. Pers. divân, a collection of writings, register, account-book; board of accounts, custom-house (It. dogana,

Fr. douane), council, senate ; council-chamber, raised seat.
To Dive. AS. deofan, dufan (dyfde, dofen), to plunge in water, duck, dive ; ON. dyfa, deyfa, to dip, stick down into. Du. duypen, to duck the head.—Kil. Dan. duve, to pitch, as a ship meeting the waves; duve sig, to duck, bow the head. It. tuffare, to duck or plunge under water.
A parallel series with a final guttural is seen in Du. duiken, Bav. ducken, to duck, bow, dive; Sw. dyka, G. tauchen, to dive. See Dip.
Divide.—Division. Lat. divido, -sum, separate, cut in parts; dividuus, what may be divided.
Divine. Lat. divinus, belonging to God ; divi, Gods. Gr. διος, godlike. The Lat. divinus was applied to a prophet or soothsayer, one conversant with divine matters, as in modern times the term is applied to a clergyman. Hence divinare, to divine, foretell, prophesy, foresee, then to guess.
Dizzy. AS. dysig, dyslic, foolish ; Pl.D. diisig, d'dsig, giddy, dizzy, dilsig weder, hazy weather ; Dan. disig, hazy ; Du. duysig, deusig, stupid, giddy, stunned ; E. dizze, to stun. ' Etourdir, to astonish, dizze, amaze.'—Cotgr. Bav. dusen, du-seln, dusseln, to be still, to slumber, to be giddy ; dasig, submissive, tame ; dausig, dusig, dull, foolish. E. to daze, to stupefy, benum ; dasyd or bedasyd, vertiginosus.—Pr. Pm. To dozen, dosen, to stupefy with a blow or otherwise, to lose power and life, benum, become torpid.—Jam. ON. dos, das, languor, lassitude. Hann liggr i dosi, he lies in a faint. Dan. dös, drowsiness, dose, to doze, to mope.
To Do. OHG. duan, tuan, G. thun, Du. doen, to do.
It is often said that da in the inquiry after a person's health is properly the Sc. dow, Du. doogen, deugen, G. taugen, to be able or good for, to avail, to thrive ; but there is no need of such a supposi-tion. We ask how a thing does, mean-ing, how does it perform the office ex-pected of it, and the word is used in a very similar sense in the inquiry, How do you do ?—How do you get on ? How do you perform the offices of life ? It is a simple translation of the OFr. Com-ment le faites-vous ?
Puis li a dit par grant douçor, Sire, comment le faites-vos ? Dame, bien, dit le Segretains. Fab. et Contes. i. 245.
' David demanded of him how Joab did, and how the people did, and how the war prospered.' In the Livre des Rois : E David—enquist cume Joab le fist, e li poples, e coment il le feissent del siege—and how they got on with the siege.

Docile.—Doctor.—Doctrine.—Docu-ment. Lat. doceo, doctum, to teach, do-cilis, easy to be taught ; doctor, a teacher, doctrina, what is taught, documentum, that by which one is taught.
Dock. 1. G. docke, a bundle, bunch of thread, knot of cords, baluster, plug, stopple, a short thick piece of anything. Fris. dok, a small bundle, ball of twine, bunch of straw. It. tocco, a scrap, cob, collop, cut or shive, viz. of bread and cheese.—Fl. w. toc, that is short or abrupt ; tocyn, a short piece ; tocio, to reduce to a short bit, to curtail, explain-ing the E. dock, to reduce to a stump, to cut short. ON. dockr, a short stumpy tail. The term dock is applied to several plants having leaves broad in proportion to their length, as sour-dock, sorrel, bur-dock, butter-dock (Du. docke-blaederen, petasites), AS. ea-dock, Swab. wasser-docklein, the water-lily. Another appli-cation of the term is to the rump of an animal, butt end of a tree, the thick end.—Hal.
Dock, like other words signifying a lump, is probably derived from the no-tion of knocking. Du. docken, dare pugnos, ingerere verbera.—Kil. It. toc-care, to knock. Compare dump, to beat (Jam.), with dumpy ; dunch, to beat, with dunch, one who is short and thick—Jam. ; to punch, to strike, with punchy, short and thick, &c.
Dock. 2. The cage in a court of jus-tice in which a criminal is placed at his trial. Flemish docke, a bird-cage.—Kil.
Dock. 3. An inclosed basin for re-pairing ships. A pond where the water is kept out by great flood-gates till the ship is built or repaired, but are opened to let in the water to float or launch her.—B. Both in this sense and in that of a cage the meaning is probably to be explained through the notion of stopping up, hem-ming in, confining. The G. docke, signi-fying primarily a bunch, is applied to the tap by which the water of a fish-pond is kept in or let off.—Adelung. Hence the name seems to have been transferred to a naval dock, the essential provision of which is the power of keeping in or shut-ting out the water by an analogous con-trivance, though on a greatly magnified scale. Clausa, en cluse (a sluice or flood-gate), tock; i. q. docke, obturamen- tum piscinae.—Dief. Sup. See Dam.
From signifying the plug or sluice by which the flow of water is regulated, the word is applied to the dam of which the sluice forms part, and generally to the dam or bank of a ditch or artificial piece of water, to the conduit through which the water flows away, to a spout, gutter, watercourse. In the former sense we have Prov. doga, douva, Fr. douve, douhe, a bank. ' Douvam sive aggerem dicti fossati.' ' Qui a douhe, il a fossé,' who- ever possesses the bank, he has the ditch.
In the sense of a conduit ; ' fossas in circuitu basilicas fieri jussit ne forte dogis occultis lymphae deducerentur in fontem.' —Gregory of Tours in Diez. In It. we have doccia, a mill-dam, a spout, gutter ; Sp. daguancho, a rush of water, watercourse ; It. docciare, to spout, to let water run with some force upon one's head for to cleanse and wash it, as they use in Italy.—Fl. Whence the modern E. douche, a bath taken by pour- ing water from a height on the patient.
In the sense of a water-conduit we find dozza (doccia, dozza, as faccioletto, fazzo- letto) in a passage misunderstood by Carpentier. ' Statutum est quod canalis de S. Catharina—ducatur tantum per dozzam, quae est—sub fundo circae (by the culvert which is under the bottom of the ditch), et quod terralium et ripa dictae circae claudatur in totum usque ad dic- tam dozzam ita quod nulla ruptura sit in dicto terralio, et a latere foras dictae circae in capite dozzae possit fieri una clusa alta (a deep sluice, or flood-gate, at the head of the culvert) super dictam dozzam,' &c. The sense of stopping up is expressed by the same root in the Finnish languages. Fin. tukko, a lump, bunch, tuft ; tukkia, to stop an orifice ; tuket, a stopper, the condition of being shut up ; tukkuta, to be stopped up, to stagnate, as water. Magy. dugni, to stuff ; dugasz, a stopper, bung.
Docket. A small piece of paper or parchment, containing the heads of a large writing.—B. A shred, or piece.— Hal. A diminutive of dock, in the ori- ginal sense. W. tocyn, a small piece, or slip, a ticket.
Dod. Synonymous in several of its senses with Dock. Fris. dodd, dadde, a lump, clump, bunch.—Outzen. Sc. dawd, a lunch, lump. Du. dot, a bunch of twisted thread.—Halma.

To dod is to reduce to a lump, to cut off excrescences, to curtail. Doddyn trees or herbs, or other like, decomo, capulo. Doddyd, without horns. Doddyd, as trees, decomatus, mutilus.—Pr. Pm. Doddy, low in stature, like a lump. Fr. dodu, fat, plump, full-bodied.—Cot. Doddy-pate, or doddy-poll, is equivalent to block-head, or numskull, jobber-noil, lump-headed. Fris. dodd, a simpleton. Du. dots-kop, a blockhead.—Halma.
Dod.—Dodder. Sc. dad, a slam; to fall, or clap down forcibly, and with noise. He fell with a dad.—Jam. Hence dad, a lump, large piece, synonymous with dod. Sc. dod, to jog. To dad, to shake, to strike.—Hal. To dodder, didder, dither, to shake, to tremble; doddered, shaken, shattered. A doddered oak, a shattered oak. A dodderel, or pollard, is from dod in the other sense of the term, to poll, or cut short.
Dodge. To dodge, to jog, to move quickly to and fro, to deceive by a rapid turn. Sc. datch, to jog, to shake ; dodd, to jog ; to dad down, to fall or clap down with a noise ; to dad, to dash, to bang ; dad, dawd, a lump, large piece of any- thing. Swiss datsch, dotsch, a blow with the open hand ; something broad and flat like a soft substance thrown on the ground ; datschnase, a squabnose ; datsch, the noise of a blow or the blow itself, clap, smack.
Doe. Lat. dama, G. dam, AS. da, Dan. daa, fallow-deer ; It. daino as E. doe, the female of the same kind. Gael. damh, an ox, a stag.
Dog. ON. doggr, Du. dogghe, a large dog. The uprights in front of the iron bars on which the logs in a fireplace rest, are called dogs, in Swiss feuer-hund, probably from the resemblance to a dog sitting on its haunches ; in Pol. and Lith. wilki, a wolf. ON. sitia vid dogg, to sit up in bed.
Doggrel. Pitiful poetry.
Now swiche a rime the devil I beteche, This may wel be clepe rime dogerel quod he.
Chaucer, Prol. Melibeus.
Dogma.—Dogmatic. Gr. δόγμα, an authoritative sentence, a decree, from δοκέω), to think, judge, δοκεῖ, it seems good, δέδοκται, it has been resolved, de- creed.
Doiley. A small napkin used at des- sert, said to be derived from the name of a dealer by whom they were introduced.
The stores are very low, Sir, some Doiley pet- ticoats and manteaus we have, and half a dozen pairs of laced shoes.—Dryden, Kind Keeper.

There is, however, a singular resemblance to Du. dwaele, dwele, a towel; Swiss dwaheli, a napkin.
* Doit. Du. duit, the smallest coin, the 160th part of a guilder. It is also used in the more general sense of a particle or least bit. Hij gelijkt hem op een' duit: he resembles him to a hair.—Bomhoff. It is used in Yorkshire synonymous with moit, a mote or atom. 'There was nowther head nor hair on't, moit nor doit, every fraction had disappeared.—Whitby Gloss. Analogous forms are seen in dot, jot, tot, representing probably in the first instance a slight utterance, then a slight movement, a particle or small portion of bodily substance. So Gr. γρῦ, a slight sound, a least bit; οὐδὲ γρῦ, not a syllable, not a bit. It is remarkable also that γρῦ, according to Suidas, like doit and mite, was used as the name of a small coin. It. non fare ne motto ne totto, not to let one's breath be heard, not to stir. As motto corresponds to moit, so totto to doit. See Mote, Mite.
-dole.—Doleful. Sc. dule, dool, grief; to sing dool, to lament.—Jam. Lat. dolere, to grieve; It. duolo, doglia, pain, grief; Fr. deuil, mourning. Ir. doilbh, doilse, dark, gloomy, sorrowful, mournful; doilbheas, doilgheas, affliction, sorrow; Gael. doilleir, dim, dark; duilbhearra (Ir. duilbhir), sad, anxious, melancholy. The opposites to these last are soilleir, bright, clear, and suilbhir, cheerful, joyful, constructed with the particle so equivalent to the Gr. εὖ, as the former series with the particle do equivalent to the Gr. δυσ. See Dear, Dark. In like manner Gael. dolus, woe, grief; solas, solace, comfort. The idea of darkness is always connected with that of grief and melancholy. E. dial. dowly, dingy, colourless, doleful.—Hal.
Dole. 2. A portion, or lot. See Deal.
Dole. 3. Doles, dools, slips of pasture left between furrows of ploughed lands.—B. 'Cursed be he that translateth the bounds and doles of his neighbour.'—Injunction 19 Eliz. in Brand's Pop. Ant. A dole-meadow is a meadow in which the shares of different proprietors are marked by doles or landmarks. Now the simplest division of property would be a strip of turf left unploughed. Pl.D. dole, a small ditch with the sod turned up beside it for a landmark; uutdolen, so to mark the division of properties with a ridge and furrow.—Brem. Wtb. The word is probably at bottom identical with W. twll, a pit, Bohem. dŭl, a pit, ditch; then (as DOME 219 the ditch and bank are made by flinging on the one side the earth taken up from the other) applied both to ridge and furrow, and subsequently appropriated to either as accidental circumstances might determine. We find the same duplicity of meaning in dike, and mote, the term by which we designate the ditch of a castle, signifies in It. the mound on which the castle is built. Dole, a boundary mark, either a post or a mound of earth, a lump of anything.—Hal. Doel, a butt, or mound of turf for archers to shoot at.—Kil. Dool, dole, the goal in a game of football, &c.—Jam.
Doll. Properly a bunch of rags. Fris. dok, G. docke, a little bundle, as of thread, a wisp of straw, also a doll; Swab. döckle, a doll; dokkelen, to play with a doll. Banff. doll, a large lump of anything. So in Fin. nukka, a flock, rag, patch; nukki, nuket, a doll, pupa lusoria puellarum ex panniculis. If I were mad I should forget my son, Or madly think a babe of clouts were he. K. John.
Dollar. Du. daler; G. thaler, said to be so named from having been struck at Joachimsthal in Bohemia.
Dolorous. See Dole. Lat. doleo, to grieve; dolor, grief, pain.
Dolt. Swab. dalde, dalter, dodle, dalle, dohle, dallebatsch, dallewatsch, dalpe, dalper, a foolish, awkward, clumsy person; dalpicht, talkicht, clumsy, clownish; dalpen, talken, to handle awkwardly; G. tölpel, a dolt, blockhead. Bav. dalken, to work in sticky, doughy materials; verdalken, to blot, dawb, do a thing unskilfully, spoil by awkwardness; dalkend, dalket, sticky, awkward; der dalk, the awkward person.—Schmel.
Dome.—Domestic.—Domicile. Lat. domus, a house. Gr. δῶμος, δῶμα. It is doubtful how the term dome came to be applied to a cupola or vaulted roof. A cathedral is in It. duomo, in G. dom, and a dome may be so called because it was the ornament of a cathedral church. A church in general was called domus Dei, the house of God, and probably the name was given to a cathedral church par excellence. On the other hand we find that the Gr. δῶμα was used for a roof. 'Doma in Orientalibus provinciis ipsum dicitur quod apud Latinos tectum, in Palæstina enim et Ægypto—non habente in tectis culmina sed domata, quæ Romæ vel Solaria, vel Mæniana vocant, id est, plana tecta quæ transversis trabibus sustentant— tur.'—St Jerome in Duc. Δῶμα, tectum.—Gloss. Gr. Lat. Ibid. The word domus is commonly derived from the Gr. δέμω, to build, but this I be-lieve is putting the cart before the horse. The form with the narrow vowel is com-monly the derivative, and πένθομαι is de-rived from πόνος, labour, deem from doom, and not not vice versa. We have then the most natural derivation for the word sig-nifying a dwelling, in the notion of a hearth or fire-place.

The Fin. sawu, signifying smoke, is applied in the second place to a house, household, family living in a house, and in like manner the W. mwg, smoke, is identical with Bret. moug or mog, a fire, hearth, household, house, while a deriva-tive moged is in the latter dialect used for smoke. In like manner Pol. dym (radic-ally identical with θυμός and fumus) is rendered smoke, cottage, house, while the form dom is also used in the latter sense.

Bohem. dym, smoke; dum, a house; Lith. dumas, smoke. In a rude state of society the hearth is almost universally taken as a type of the family shelter or house.

The census includes those provinces beyond the frontiers dependant on the empire, which are numbered by fire-places or houses.—Population of China, Amer. Orient. Soc.

Feu, famille, habitation, domicile.—Ro-quef.

The G. rauch, smoke, is tropically used for a dwelling-house. Rauch und Brot haben, to have his own dwelling and food.—Adelung. It. fumante, house, family. ' Et facere dare in perpetuum promise-runt sex Lucences pro Fumante, qui parium boum habuerint.'—Carp. in v. Fumans.

In 1680 so many families perished for want that for six miles in a well-inhabited extent, within the year there was not a smoke remaining.—Jam.

Sw. roek, smoke, also domicilium, focus.—Ihre.

Dominion.—Domain. Lat. dominus, a lord, must probably be explained from domus, the man of the house, master of the house.

Domino. Sp. dominó, Fr. domino, a kind of hood, worn by canons, and hence a fashion of veil worn by women that mourn.—Cot. Now applied to a masquerade dress.

Donation, -don. Lat. dare, to give; donum, a gift; dono, to make a gift; condono, to present, remit, forgive.

Doom.—To Deem. Goth. doms, judg-ment; domjan, AS. deman, to distinguish, think, judge, deem. Lith. dumà, mind, thought, opinion; dumóti, to be of opinion, to have in the mind; apsidumóti, to remember. Let. dohmaht, Russ. dumat', to think, to be of opinion. Gr. θυμός, breath, life, soul, mind, thought, resolve. The ulti-mate meaning is doubtless the breath, from Russ. dut', Illyr. duti, duhati, du-vati, to blow, to breathe; Gr. φύω, pro-perly to blow or breathe, then to storm, to rage, to rush, to breathe out odours, to sacrifice; Magy. fúni, to blow, to snort.

Door. Gr. θύρα, Goth. daur, G. thor, thüre, Sanscr. dvár, Lith. durris, Slav. dvyry, &c.

Dor. A drone bee, a beetle. Perhaps from the humming sound made by ani-mals of this class in flying. Gael. dùr-dan, humming noise; dùrdail, murmur-ing, grumbling, cooing like a dove. Ir. dordam, to hum like a bee; dord, hum-ming or muttering. But the Du. form, tor, torre, a beetle, is against this deriva-tion.

To Dor. To befool one, put a trick upon him. ON. dár, irrisio; dára, to deride, befool; dári, Dan. daare, a fool; bedaare, to delude, befool; Du. door, G. thor, a fool.

Doree. Fr. dorée, the doree or St Peter's fish—Cot., from the yellow colour of the skin.

Dormant.—Dormer. Fr. dormant, quiescent, sleeping, from dormir, to sleep. Eau dormante, standing water. A dor-mant claim, a claim in abeyance. A dormer was a sleeping apartment, whence a dormer window, a window in the roof, usually appropriated to sleeping apart-ments.

Dormouse. Probably for dorm-mouse, from the winter sleep of the ani-mal, on which account it is in Suffolk called sleepers; in Bret. hunegan, from hun, sleep. Lang. dourmeire, a slum-berer; radourmeire, a dormouse. In Cotswold the name of dormouse is applied to the bat, which also has a winter sleep. N.E. to dorm, to doze; Hereford dorme-dory, a sleepy, inactive person.—Hal. Sw. dial. dormeter, dormig, sleepy, slow; dorma, to doze, to faint; Swab. durmen, durmeln, to slumber; Lat. dormire, to sleep.

Dorsal, -dorse. Lat. dorsum, the back. Endorse, Fr. endosser, to write on the back of a document.

Dose. The quantity of medicine given at once. Gr. δόσις, from δίδωμι, to give.
Dosil. Fr. dousil, dusil, a spigot, faucet, peg or tap to draw off liquor from a cask, derived by Diez from ducere, to lead. The fundamental idea is a bunch of something thrust in to stop an orifice. G. docke, a bunch, also the tap of a fish-pond.—Adelung. In It. doccia the signification is extended to a mill dam, and as it is the office of a tap to let the water flow, doga (Gregory of T.), a water conduit. It. doccia, dozza, a spout, gutter, water conduit. Prov. dotz; OFr. doiz, dois, source of water, conduit.
C'est la fontaine, c'est la doiz Dont sortent tuit li let péchié— Rome est la doiz de la malice.—Raynouard.
Prov. adozilhar, Fr. doisiller, to pierce.
At the same time a parallel line of development seems to have taken place in the Teutonic languages from a root doss of the same signification with dock. Gael. dos, bush, tuft, cluster ; E. dial. doss, a hassock; dosset, a small quantity; dossel, a wisp of hay or straw, to stop up a hole in a barn, a plug. Swiss düssel, a wooden tap. E. dosil, a tent for a wound, probably comes from the French. Compare Fr. bousche, a bush or bunch; boucher, to stop; bouchon, a stopper, cork. And see Dot, Dit.
Dot.—To Dit. Dot, the mark of a mere touch with the pen, a spot, also a small lump. Cot. speaks of 'a dot, clot or congealed lump of phlegm, blood, &c.' Du. dot, a knot of silk or thread. N. dott, Da. tot, a tuft, wisp, bunch. Then, like other words signifying a bunch or lump, applied to something used for stopping a hole. Du. dodde (Kil.), Pl.D. dutte, a plug or stopper. Sc. dottle, a small particle; E. dottle, a stopper; to dutten or dit, to stop, shut, fasten.—Hal.
Dot or tot represents in the first instance a slight utterance, as shown under Doit, then a slight movement, a small portion. To tot something down in the margin is to put down a hasty note; to tot up an account, to touch each item as you cast them up; to tot one's t's, to give the short cross stroke. The dim. tittle signifies the dot over an i, and also a small particle. ON. datta, to beat gently, as the heart; Sw. dial. dutta, dätta, dötta, N. dutte, dytta, to touch, to knock; Sc. dod, to jog; Sw. dial. dett, ditt, a dot or spot, a little lump. See Jot, Tit.
-dote. Gr. δότος, to be given, from δίδωμι, to give. Hence ἀντίδοτον, a remedy against poison ; ἀνέκδοτος, not given out, unpublished.

\* To Dote. Fr. dotter, radoter, to dote, rave.—Cot. Dotard, an old doting man, and fig. a decayed tree.
The radical sense seems to be to nod the head, thence to become sleepy, to doze, to become confused in the understanding. ON. datta, to beat as the heart, Sw. dial. datta, to shake ; ON. dotta, to nod with sleep, to slumber ; Devon. doattee, to nod the head while sitting up when sleep comes on. Sc. dute, dut, to doze, slumber, be in a sleepy state. Auld dut, an old dotard. Du. dut, slumber, sleep, doting. He 'zit in den dut, he slumbers, he dotes. Dutten, to doze, slumber, to dote, rave, be out of one's mind.—Halma.
Dotterel. A bird proverbial for stupidity, from dote.
Double.—Duplicate.—Duplicity. Lat. plico, to fold; duplex, twofold, double.
Doublet. Originally a wadded garment for defence. Fr. doublé. Dobbelet, bigera, diplois (duplex vestis et est vestis militaris).—Pr. Pm.
To Doubt. Fr. doubter; Lat. dubitare, from dubius, doubtful, what may turn out in two ways.
Dough. AS. dah, ON. deig, G. teig, a soft wet material moulded by the hands.
The ultimate origin is shown in E. daggle, Salzburg taggln, Bav. tegelen, to dabble, dawb, smear; or with the nasal, Siles. tengeln, betengeln, to bedaggle, Swiss tanggen, tanggeln, tanscheln (as well as teiggen, teiggelen), to knead, to work in paste; tang, tanggig, soft, clammy.
From daggle or tegeln we pass to Bav. tegel, tahel, tahen, tah, clay, loam, and thence earthen vessel; OHG. daha, taha, clay, loam; ON. deigr, Swiss teig (Schmidt, Id. Bern.), wet, soft; Goth. deigan, to mould in plastic materials; gadikis (OHG. tegel), the thing moulded, an earthen vessel. 'Μη ἔρει τὸ πλάσμα τῷ πλάσαντι,' in Goth. 'ibai quithith gadikis du thamma digandin:' 'shall the thing moulded say to him who moulded it.' A like connection between expressions for dabbling in the wet and working in plastic material may be observed in E. plash compared with Gr. πλάσσω, to form. See Plaster.
Professor Aufrecht points out that the ordinary rule of consonantal change shown in Lat. fores, Gr. θύρα, door; in rufus, Gr. ἐρυθρός, red; uber (for ufer), Gr. οὖθαρ, udder, would render the Lat. fingere, to form, and figulus, a potter, the exact equivalents of Goth. deigan, digands.

For other examples of the same consonantal change see Foul.
Doughty. AS. dohtig, valiant ; dugan, Du. deugen, doghen, doogen, valere, probum esse, in pretio esse ; deughd, virtus, valor, probitas ; deughdelick, sound, good ; G. taugen, to be good for, to be of value ; tugend, virtue ; tuchtig, Lap. doktok, sufficient for its purpose, sound, strong.
To Douse. Du. doesen, pulsare cum impetu et fragore.—Kil.
To Dout. To extinguish a candle, to do out, as don, to do on ; doff, to do off.
Dove. Du. duyve, ON. dufa, perhaps from its habit of ducking the head, from Du. duypen, to duck the head ; N. duva, to duck the head, to dip ; Sanscr. dubh, dive ; as we find Lat. columba, in a similar connection with Gr. κολυμβᾶν, to dive.
Than peine I me to stretchen forth my neck And East and West upon the people I beck, As doth a dove sitting upon a beam. Pardoner's Tale.
Dowdy. Shabby in dress.—Hal. The fundamental idea is however torpor, sloth, while that of carelessness of dress or appearance is an incidental application. Sc. dawdie, a dirty, slovenly woman ; to dawdle, to be indolent or slovenly ; Pl.D. dödeln, to be slow, not to get on with a thing.—Schütze. -ON. dodi, languor ; dodaskapr, Dan. dovenskab, sloth, languor. For the ultimate origin see Deaf.
Dowel. A projection in a stone to fit into a socket and fasten it into the adjacent one ; a wooden peg fastening two boards together. Fr. douelle, douille, a tap or socket ; G. döbel, a peg, plug, stopper.—Kütn. Bav. düpel s. s., especially the dowel or wooden peg entering into each of two adjacent boards to fasten them together, a damper of clay to stop the chimney of the oven, a clump of flax, of people, &c.—Schmeller.
Du. douwen, to press into ; jemand iets in de hand douwen, or steeken, to put something secretly into one's hand.—Halma. Pl.D. duwen, to press, press down.
Dower.—Dowager.—Endow. Lat. dos, dotis, a marriage gift ; dotare, Fr. douer, E. endow, to furnish with a marriage portion. Mid.Lat. dotarium, Prov. dotaire, Fr. douaire, a dowry or marriage provision ; douairière, a widow in possession of her portion, a dowager.
Dowle. A portion of down, feather. 'Young dowl of the beard.'—Howel in f. Hal. Fr. douille, douillet, soft, delicate. Lith. duja, a mote, pl. dujos, dust ; du-joti, to float in the air ; duje and the dim. dujele, a dowl or down-feather.
Down. 1. Applied to things light enough to float in the air, as thistle-down. G. daune, ON. dún, the lightest and softest kind of feather ; Du. donse, donst, down of feathers or of the typha, sawdust, meal, flour.—Kil. G. dunst, exhalation, vapour, mist, fume. The primary signification is probably mist or vapour, the down being compared for lightness to vapour floating in the air. Thus the Esthon. has uddo or udsu, mist ; uddo karwda down-hair, uddo-sulled or udso-sulle, down-feathers (karwad = hair ; sulled = feathers). Traces of this sense are seen in the ON. daun, odour, smell. But most likely the final consonant was originally an m instead of an n, as preserved in Esthon. tuum sulle, down-feathers, and in the E. dial. dum, down, fur. A duck or a goose is said to dum her nest when she lines it with some of her own feathers plucked off for that purpose.—Hal.
The same form was extant in OFr. (Diez v. duvet), and is preserved by the Emperor Frederick II. in Duc. 'Innascitur vero avibus plumagium multiplex—Secundo innascuntur aliæ [plumæ] quas dicuntur lanulæ, a quibusdam dumæ, hæ sunt exiles et molles, densiores et longiores primis, &c.' Hence the Fr. dial. dumet, which has become duvet in ordinary Fr.—Menage. Dumetti, downie.—Cot. The origin is seen in the ODu. dom, vapour ; Bohem. dym, smoke ; Du. domp, vapour, exhalation, breath, whence Pl.D. dumpstig, dumstig, dunstig, vaporous, bringing us round to the G. dunst.
The same consonantal change which is seen in the Fr. dumet, duvet, dubet, is also found in the modifications of the same root having the sense of vapour, exhalation, odour. Thus we unite the Du. dom, vapour, with Sp. tufo, a vapour, exhalation, stink, Dan. duft, fragrance, odour, ON. dúpt, Sw. doft, dust, dofta, to evaporate. With an initial s, Sc. stove, steev, a vapour, smoke, dust ; Du. stof, stuyf, stuyve, dust, whatever floats in the air ; stuyf-sand,—meel, arena, farina volatica ; stof, flocks of wool ; stof-hayr, down-hair ; stuyfken, the down of flowers = Fr. duvet.
2. Du. duyne, Fr. dunes, sand-hills by the sea-side. Fris. döhne, a hillock of sand or snow driven by the wind. AS. dun, a hill. Gael. dùn, a heap, hill, mount, fortified place.
The adverb down is from AS. of dune, as the OFr. à mont and à val, to the hill and to the valley, for upwards and downwards respectively. Of dune, deorsum.—Lye.

Doxy. — Gixy. Probably from the rogues' cant. Fr. gueuse, a woman beggar, a she rogue, a doxy or mort. Goguenelle, a feigned title for a wench, like our gixie, callet, minx, &c.—Cot. Doxy, a sweetheart.—Hunter.

To Doze. Bav. dosen, to keep still, to listen, to slumber ; dusen, dussen, to slumber ; Dan. dose, to doze, to mope ; dysse, to lull ; taus, silent, hushed. And see the forms cited under Dismal. The fundamental image is probably the deep breathing in sleep represented by the syllable dus, tus. Lith. dusas, a deep breath, dwasas, the breath ; dusti, dwisti, to breathe ; Bohem. dusati, to snort. In like manner a representation of the same sound by the syllable sough, swough, gave rise to the OE. swough, sleep, swoon, Sc. souch, swouch, souf, the deep breathing of sleep, silent, quiet ; ON. svefia (as Dan. dysse), to quiet, svefn, sleep ; AS. suwian, swugan, to be silent.

Dozen. Fr. douzaine, from douze, twelve.

Drab. 1. Du. drabbe, Dan. drav, Gael. drabh, draff, dregs ; Du. drabbig, feculentus ; Gael. drabach, nasty, dirty, slovenly ; drabag, a dirty female, a drab ; drabaire, a dirty, slovenly man. Banff. drabble, a person of dirty habits. A dirty woman is called in Dan. dial. drav-so, drav-trug, a draff-pail.—Molbech. The radical image is dabbling in the wet and dirt. See Drabble.
2. The grey colour of undyed cloth. Fr. drap, It. drappo, cloth. See Drape.

Drabble. — Draggle. Drabble and draggle in the first instance probably, like dabble and daggle, signify to paddle in the wet. Du. drabben, ire per loca lutosa.—Bigl. Drabelyn, drakelyn, paludo ; drapled, drablyd, paludosus, lutulentus.—Pr. Pm. One is said to drable his claise who slabbers his clothes when eating.—Jam. PLD. drabbeln, to slobber, let liquids fall over one in eating ; drabbelbart, one who dirties himself in such a manner. Banff. draggle, to moisten meal slightly ; Sc. draglit, bedirtied, bespattered.—Gl. Dougl. ; Sw. dragla, dregla, to slobber, drivel, let the spittle fall from the mouth. AS. drefliende, rheumaticus.—Lye. See Draff. Sc. draked or drawked, mingled with water or mire.—Gl. Dougl., reduced to a dreggy condition ; Gael. druaip, DRAG lees, dregs, sediment ; druablas, muddy liquor.

In modern usage all sense of a derivation from a word signifying dregs or dirt has been lost, and draggle is understood as if it were a frequentative from drag, signifying what has been dragged in the mire.

Draff. AS., Du. drabbe, Dan. drav, ON. draf, dregs, husks, hogswash, refuse food for hogs. Draffe, or drosse, or matter stamped, pilumen.—Pr. Pm. G. träbern, brewers' grains ; Gael. druaip, Lett. drabbini, Illyr. drôp, dropina, Russ. drobina, dregs, lees ; Du. drabbig, E. dial. dravy, drovy, thick, muddy, dirty. Drubby, muddy.—Hal. Drobly, of drestys, feculentus, turbulentus.—Pr. Pm. Draff, chaff.

Why shuld I sowen draf out of my fist Whan I may sowen whete, if that me list. Chaucer in Way.

The change of the final labial for a guttural gives rise to a series of forms that cannot be separated from the foregoing. ON. dregg, E. dregs, sediment ; Prov. draco, dregs of the vintage ; Rouchi draque, OFr. drague, drache, drasche, drèche, dresche, draff, brewers' grains, dregs of brewing. The form drasche was Latinised as drascus, drasqua, and from the facility with which the sound of sc passes into that of st, gave the Latinised drastus, as well as drascus.—Way. Hence the OE. forms drast, drest, traist ; AS. dresten, fæces ; G. trestern, dregs. For the change of the final consonant compare Fr. buc, busche, busc, bust, a bust, trunk.

Again, the sound of the Fr. ch in some dialects of France regularly corresponds to that of ss in others, as the Picard or Norman cacher to the Fr. chasser. In like manner the form drache leads to the AS. dros, fæx, sordes, Du. droessem, dregs, dras, mud.—Halma. OE. drass, dross, refuse, cleansings of corn, metal, &c. Drosse, or fylthe whereof it be, ruscum ; drosse or drasse of corn, acus, criballum.—Pr. Pm. Pol. drożdże (ż = Fr. j), Walach. droschdii, dregs, lees.

The Gael, leads us to the same forms through a different route ; drabh, draff, grains of malt ; drabhag, dregs, sediment, refuse ; drabhas, filth, foul weather, obscenity ; draos, trash, filth.

The origin is probably exhibited in drabble, draggle, to dabble, paddle in the wet and mud. Goth. drobjan, to stir up, to trouble.

To Drag.—Draw. AS. dragan, ON.

draga, to drag or draw; Du. draghen, G. tragen, to carry. Du. trecken, to draw as a sword, to trace outlines; treck-brugghe, a draw-bridge; treck-net, a drag-net. Lat. trahere, to draw.
To Draggle. See Drabble.
Dragon. Lat. draco, Gr. δράκων, a sort of large serpent, Fr. dragon.
Dragoon. Described by Skinner as cavalry carrying fire-arms, and therefore capable of service either on horseback or on foot. As the French carabins, a similar kind of troops (carabijn, equester sclopetarius—Bigl.), were named from the carbine which they carried, it is probable that the dragoons, or dragooners (Du. dragonder), as they were also called, had a similar origin. Dragon, a species of carbine—Hal., so named, no doubt, after the analogy of culverin, Fr. couleuvrine, from couleuvre, a snake. Drake, a kind of gun.—Bailey.
* Drain, i. W.E. rhine, reen, a water-course, an open drain—Jennings; Lanc. reean, rindle, a gutter.—Hal. E.E. drean, a cut, drain; drindle, a channel, water-course, furrow.—Moor.
' Here also it receiveth the Baston dreane, Longtoft dreane. Deeping dreane, and thence goeth by Wickham into the sea.'—Hollinshed. For the identity of reen or rhine and drain, comp. rill, a watercourse, and drill, a furrow; Sc. dredour and reddour, fear, G. rieseln and E. drizzle. The form drindle points to the origin of the word in the notion of falling bit by bit, dribbling, trickling down. ' He is the drindlest man I ever did business with :' the slowest.—Moor. Drindle is the nasalised form of Sc. driddle, to spill anything, to let fall from carelessness, to be constantly in action but making little progress [i. e. to keep dribbling on], to move slowly.—Jam. Sw. dial. dradda. Da. dratte, to spill, drop; drat, a scrap, slop, little bit; Sw. dial. dratta, dretta, drettla, to spill, drop, let fall, dribble; E. dial. tridlins, the dung of sheep (which falls dribbling down in separate pellets); Banff, trintle, trinkle, trinnle, the sound made by a liquid falling in drops, or by any hard comminuted substance falling in small quantities; to fall in drops, in a small gentle stream, in small quantities. ' The corn cam trinnlin' oot o' a wee holie in the saick.' ' It winna lat oot the wort bit in a mere trinnle.' The primary notion of drindle and the derivative drain would thus be a dribbling stream.
2. The spent refuse of malt in brewing are still called brewers' drains in Suffolk, probably the truer form, which has in general given way to brewers' grains. ' Drascus—nos de la drague dicimus, Angli draines et draff.'—Duc. Probably from the same root with dregs and connected with forms like Lith. drėgti, to become wet, to thaw; drėgnas, wet, sloppy; dranka, hogswash; Sw. dragg, drank, distillers' wash or grains, dregs, lees; Russ. drán, drántza, dirt, rubbish, refuse.
Drake. The male of birds is in one or two instances designated by the syllable rick, drick, drake. Dan. due, a dove; duerik, a male dove; and, a duck; andrik, Sw. and-drake, a drake; G. ente, a duck; enterick, a drake. The same variation between an initial r and dr is found in the original sense of the word. OHG. recke, a warrior, hero; ON. reckr, vir, miles; OE. renk, rink; ON. drengr, a warrior. In like manner the Fin. uros (identical with the Gr. ἥρως and Lat. herus, G. herr, master) signifies a grown man, brave man, and the male of animals; uros-puoli, the male sex; uros-lintu, a male bird; uro-teko, a heroic deed. Anser (vir aucarum) eyn herr unter den gensen.—Dief. Sup.
To Drake.—Drack.—Drawk. To saturate with water—Hunter; to mix with mire or water.—Gloss. Dougl. Draplyd, drablyd, paludosus. Drablyn, drakelyn, paludo.—Pr. Pm. Drakes, a slop, a mess.—Hal. Pl.D. drekmetje, a woman who dirties her clothes, a draggle-tail; dreksoom, the border of wet at the bottom of a bedraggled gown.—Schütze. ON. dreckia, and (as the root takes a nasal form in Sw. drank, dregs, grains, wash) Sw. dranka, to plunge in water. Lith. drėgnas, wet, sloppy, dreginti, drė-kinti, to make wet. See Drabble.
Drake. 2.—Drawk. Drake, drawk, drank, drunk, darnel, a mischievous weed among corn. ' Le yveraye (darnel) i crest, et le betel (drauke).'—Bibelsworth in Way. Du. dravick, ægilops, vitium secalis.—Kil. w. drewg, Bret. draok, dreok, Wal. drauwe, darnel.
Dram.—Drachm. Gr. δραχμή, a drachm or dram, a weight of 60 grains. It. dramma, a very small quantity of anything. Bret. drammour, an apothecary, one who retails medicaments in drams. In Normandy the term drame is applied to a pinch of snuff.—Patois de Bray. In Denmark, as in England, it is used for a small glass of spirits, a dose of spirits.—Molb. Dial. Lex.
Drama.—Dramatic. Gr. δρᾶμα, an act, a performance, from δράω, to do, enact.
Drape.—Draper. Fr. drap, cloth. Sp. trapo, rag, tatter (which seems the original signification), cloth. A todo trapo, with every rag of canvas set. Perhaps from the sound of a flapping piece of cloth represented by the syllable trap. Sp. gualdrape, the housings or trappings of a horse, the long hangings with which they were covered on occasions of state; also a tatter, rag hanging down from clothes; gualdrapazo, slap of the sails against the mast.
Draught. What is dragged or drawn. A draught of water, so much as is drawn down the throat at once. A draught of fishes, what is taken at one drag of the net. A move at chess or similar game was formerly known by this name, whence the game of draughts, of moves with separate pieces.
The burgeise took avisement long on every draught— Draw on, said the burgeise, Beryn, ye have the wers— The next draught thereafter he took a rook for nought.—Beryn.
In the same way It. tiro, a move at chess, from tirare, to draw.
To Drawl. Sc. drawl, to be slow in action; Du. draelen, Fris. draulen (Wiarda), Dan. dræve (also dræbe, dræge—Moth), to delay, loiter, be slow. 'Han dræver sine ord saa langt ud,' he drawls out his words so slow. Drævs, a slow inactive person; dröole, to be slow at one's work.—Molb. Dial. Lex. Sw. dial. dribba, drebba, drula, drola, to be slow and inactive, to loiter; komma drulandes, to drag one leg after another. Du. drui-len, to loiter, slumber; W.E. driling, waste of time, drawling; dreul, to fritter away one's time; a lazy fellow.—Hal.
I am inclined to believe that the word is derived from drabble or dribble, drivel, to let fall drop by drop, to do by little and little. We have E. drool, to drivel—Jennings, Baker; bedrauled, bedrabbled, slavered over.—P. P. Sw. dial. drälla, drällta, to spill, to let fall in driblets here and there, to go to work in a slow and unskilful manner, to be slow and negli-gent; dribba, drebba, to be lazy, slow.
A like train of thought is seen in Sw. dial. dratta, to spill, to let fall, to fall by little and little; dretta, drettla, to spill, to scatter; drad, a drib, what falls drop-wise or spills over; drodd, druddele, droddekar, a slug, lazy person; drodda, to dawdle; Da. drat, scrap, slop, little bit; Du. dreutelen, Pl.D. drötelen, to loiter, idle, delay; N.E. drate, drite, to drawl.
Compare also Suffolk drindle, a small slow run of water; drindle, slow.
He Is the drindlest man I ever did business with.—Moor.
Again, Swiss droseln, tröseln, to patter down, E. drizzle, to fall in small morsels; Pl.D. drieseln, to loiter, dawdle; Du. treuzelen, to loiter, linger.
Dray. Sw. drog, a sledge, a carriage without wheels, what is dragged along, as Lat. traha s. s., from trahere, to draw. It. treggia, a hurdle, sled, harrow, truck.
Dread. E. dial. dredre, Sc. dredour, dridder, as well as raddour, reddour, fear, dread; rad, red, Sw. rædd, afraid. The radical meaning is probably to trem-ble, from OFr. dredré, onomatopoeia for the chattering of the teeth; dridriller, to jingle as mules' bells.—Roquef. Walach. derdeescu, derdĕ, Magy. dideregni, the teeth to chatter, to shiver with cold. Bret. drida, trida, to thrill or shiver for joy.
With dredfull dredour trymbling for effray The Troianis fled richt fast—D. V. 315-16.
A similar derivation for the forms red-dour, red, may be found in AS. hridrian, G. rütteln, to shake; hrith-adl, an ague or shaking sickness; hrithian (to shiver), to be ill of a fever.
Dream, ON. draumr, G. traum. Russ. dremat', to slumber, be slow; Serv. drem, drijem, slumber, sleepiness; Pol. drzy-mai, to doze, slumber, nap. Lang. droumi, dourmi, Swiss Romance droumi, dremi, to sleep.
Perhaps the confused state of mind in drowsiness and dreams may lie at the root of the word, as trouble of mind is commonly expressed by the metaphor of thickness or muddiness of liquids.
My mind is troubled like a fountain stirred. And I myself see not to the bottom of it. Thus we pass from AS. drof, Du. droef, E. dial. drevy, dravy, thick, muddy, dirty, to Du. droef, droevig, troubled in mind, sad, droeven, AS. drefan, gedrefan, to disturb, trouble, and may thence ex-plain Sc. drevilling, unsound sleep, slum-ber, E. dial. draveled, slumbered fitfully.—Hal.
Quhen langsum dreuillyng or the unsound sleep Our ene ouersettis in the nychtis rest.—D. V.
The train of thought is more complete in AS. drabbe, dregs; E. drabble, to dabble in the wet (drabelyn, paludo—Pr. Pm.), drobly, drubly (Pr. Pm.), Sc. drubly, drumbly, drumly, E. droumy (Hal.), muddy, thick, dark, troubled. 'Drubblyn or torblyn watur or other lycoure, turbo.'—Pr. Pm. The ale is drumbled, i. e. disturbed, muddy.—Jam. To drumble, to be confused in doing anything; he dreams drumbles, he is half asleep or stupid.—Hal. 'Look how you drumble.'—Shakes. Pl.D. drummeln, drömmeln, to be half asleep.—D. M. v. 54. Lith. drumsti, to make thick, to trouble; drumstas, dregs; Pl.D. dram, trouble; Sc. dram, drum, dull, melancholy.
There is a like correspondence between Du. dreck, dirt, mud, and AS. dreccan, to trouble, whence OE. drecche, dretche, to disturb or trouble, especially by dreams, and thence simply to dream.
This Chanteclere gan gronen in his throte As man that in his dreme is dretchyd sore. Chaucer.
Dremyn or dretchyn yn slepe, sompnio.—Pr. Pm.

* Dreary. AS. dreorig, OHG. trurag, G. traurig, sorrowful; OHG. getruregot, conturbata; trûren, druren, contristari, to be troubled or grieved in mind.
It seems impossible to explain the sense of the word from AS. dreore, ON. dreyri, blood, whence dreyrigr, bloody. Grimm understands it as equivalent to chopfallen, downcast; from OHG. driusan, AS. dreosan (hi druron, they fell), to fall, which is not quite satisfactory.

To Dredge.—Drizzle. To dredge, to scatter flour on meat while roasting; to dridge, to sprinkle.—Hal. Dan. drysse, to dredge, sprinkle, powder, to fall in small particles as sand. From the pattering sound of such a fall. Dan. dial. draase, drase, to fall with a pattering or rustling noise. 'Det regner saa det draaser!' G. 'Es regnet dass es dräuscht' of a heavy shower. It. trosciare, to rain or shower down most furiously; strosciare, to fall furiously and clatter withal, as rain or hail falling upon tiles or against glass windows.—Fl. Grain is said in Dan. to draase through the cracks of an old loft, or from the ears of corn when they are setting up the sheaves. This is the E. dial. durze. Dursed or dorzed out, said of corn that by wind, turning of it, &c., is beaten out of the straw.—Ray. Dras, what falls out of the corn in threshing.—Molbech. Sc. drush, atoms, fragments.—Jam. G. rieseln, to purl as a brook, to fall in grains as frozen snow or small rain, to drizzle.—Küttn. Swiss droseln, troseln, to make a rattling or rustling noise in falling, as fruit from a tree, to fall with such a noise, the fuller vowel in droseln being used of larger fruit, as apples, the thinner in droseln of nuts. Dan. drasle, to fall with a rustling noise, to patter.
In Fr. the same idea is expressed with an initial gr instead of dr; gresiller, to hail, drizzle, sleet, reem, to fall.—Cot.

Dredge. 2.—Dradge. Oats and barley mixed together.—B. Dragge, mingled corne (drage or mestlyon, P.) mixtio.—Pr. Pm. Fr. dragie aux chevaux, provender of divers sort of pulse mingled together; dravée, all kind of pulse, as beans, peas, &c.—Cot. See Drug.

Dredge. 3. Du. dregghe, harpago, et verriculum; a kind of anchor with three or four flukes, an instrument for dragging. Dregh-net, verriculum, everriculum, a dredge or kind of net for dragging along the bottom.

Dregs. See Draff.
Drench. ON. dreckia, to plunge in water; Sw. dranka, s. s., also to drown; Du. drencken, to water beasts, to lead them to drink. Probably the idea of drinking is not the original import of the root, which seems preserved in E. dial. drakes, a mess, a slop, Lith. dregnas, wet. Drakelyn, paludo.—Pr. Pm.

Dress, -dress. To prepare for any purpose. Fr. dresser, to straighten, set up, direct, fashion; —un lit, to make a bed; se faire dresser quelque chose à quelqu'un, to get him to set it straight, or to give order for it.—Cot. It. drizzare, to address or turn toward any place. Lat. dirigere, directum, to direct.

Dresser. Fr. dressoir, buffet où l'on range les plats en les dressant, a kitchen dresser.—Vocab. de Berri. Dressure or dressynge boorde, dressorium, directorium.—Pr. Pm.

To Dretch. To vex, harass, trouble, especially to trouble with dreams, to dream, also to trouble the sight, to deceive.
The radical image is probably preserved in OE. 'drakelyn, paludo' (Pr. Pm.), to trouble water, whence may be explained E. dial. drakes, a mess, Du. dreck, mud, dirt, and AS. dreccan, to trouble. Then fig. to trouble the sight, to cast a mist before the eyes.
And ever his [the hypocrite's] chere is sobre and softe, And where he goeth he blesseth ofte, Whereof the blynde world he dretcheth. Gower in R.

DRIBBLE—he bleres their eyes.
Ye schall see a wonder dreche, Whan my sone wole me fecche.
Not a sorrowful sight, probably, as explained by Hal., but a vision.
Dribble. A true dribble is a servant that is truly laborious and diligent.—B. ON. thrif, diligentia domestica, carefulness, husbandry ; thrifil, a careful man.
To Dribble.—Dribblet. To dribble, to drivel from the mouth, to give out in small portions ; drib, driblet, a small portion. Da. dial. drævel, drivel that falls from the mouth, or liquid that spills from a vessel ; drible, dreble, to drivel ; Da. draabe, a drop. The radical image may be preserved in E. drabble, to paddle in the wet, Lith. drapstyti, to splash, sprinkle, dirty. Russ. droblio, drobit', to crumble, droblenie, pulling to pieces ; drob', fragments; Boh. drobiti, to crumble ; drobet, a little of anything, a crum, a drop of water; Pol. drob, every diminutive thing ; droby, drobki, odds and ends of animal food, giblets, &c. Lett. drupt, to fall to pieces ; druppis, fragments.
Drill. 1.—Trill.—Thrill. Du. drillen, trillen, tremere, motitari, vacillare, ultro citroque cursitare, gyrosque agere, gyrare, rotare, volvere, tornare, terebrare.—Kil. The primary signification is to shake, to move to and fro; then, as vibration and revolution are characterised by the same rapid change of direction, to move round and round, and thence to bore a hole. The Du. drillen was specially applied to the brandishing of weapons ; met den pick drillen, to shake a pike—Sewel ; drilkonst, the art of handling or managing a gun. Hence drillen, as a factitive verb, to drill soldiers, or make them go through their exercise.
The place of the r is transposed in Sc. dirl, to pierce, to tingle, to thrill as with the pain of a smart blow, or from cold, to vibrate.—Jam.
He screwed the pipes and gart them skirl Till roof and rafters a' did dirl.—Burns.
The origin is seen in Fr. dredré, the chattering of the teeth ; dridriller, dridiller, to gingle, as hawks' or mules' bells ; Gael. drithlich, Fr. driller, to twinkle, glitter; the notion of chattering, trembling, quavering, shaking, glittering, being commonly expressed by modifications of the same root. Thus the Fr. has bresoler, to crackle in frying or roasting, to shiver, or thrill—Gloss. Génév.; bresiller, briller, to twinkle or glitter; It. brillare, to twinkle, sparkle, quaver with the voice.
So Fr. tresoler, trisoler, to ring a peal of bells—Roquef. ; It. trillare, trigliare, Sw. drilla, E. trill, to shake or quaver with the voice in singing; to trill upon the pin, to rattle the latch of a door in order to give notice that some one is without.
To trill, like drill, is then used in the sense of turning round, rolling.
—the sodaine smartes Which daily chaunce as Fortune trills the ball. Gascoigne in R.
The senses of shivering, turning round, piercing, are also found united in thrill, thirl, which must be classed with drill as mere differences of spelling. A thrill of emotion is a shiver or shudder of nervous excitement. ON. thirla, circumagere ; AS. thirlian, to pierce.
The notion of shaking is one of those most appropriately expressed by the frequentative form of verb. I therefore regard the Fr. dridriller, dridiller, as the original form, Bret. drida, trida, to quiver with joy, as a derivative. Hence we pass to ON. trita, to whirl; tritill, Dan. trilde, a child's top; ON. tritla, to whirl; Dan. trilde, trille, to roll; trilde-bör, a wheel-barrow.
Drill. 2. Drill, a small stream of water; to drill, to trickle or flow down in drops, or in a small stream.
There was no water on this island, but at one place close by the sea ; there it drills down slowly from the rocks, where it may be received in vessels.—Dampier in R.
Drylle, or lytylle drafte of drynke, haustillus.—Pr. Pm. Du. uut drullen, to ooze out. Probably from dribble or driddle. See Drawl. Dan. dial. drille, drilre, to spill, as water out of a full vessel ; Gael. drill, a drop, and as a verb, to drop, to drizzle ; drilseach, dropping, drizzling ; Bret. dral, W. dryll, a fragment ; drylliach, driblets, snips ; Bav. trielen, to spill in eating; Sw. dralla, to spill, to let fall here and there. To drill corn is to let it dribble out of a receptacle, like a trickling rill of water.
Drill. 3. A kind of linen cloth ; G. drillich, Mid.Lat. trilix, drilex, drylich von dreyen faden—Dief. Sup. ; Lat. licium, a thread of the warp. So twill, G. zwillich, cloth made with two divisions in the warp.
Drink.—Drench.—Drown. Goth. drigkan, ON. drecka, Dan. drikke, to drink ; ON. dreckia, to sink under water, to drown ; Dan. drukken, drunk ; drukne, to drown. E. dial. to drake or drack, to wet thoroughly, to soak in water.
To Drip. See Drop.

To Drive. AS. drifan, Goth. dreiban, G. treiben, to urge forwards, to move under the influence of an overpowering force. ON. drif, a tempest; drift-hvitr, white as the driven snow. Dreifa, to scatter.

To Drivel. To let the spittle fall like an infant. See Drabble. The connection between the slavering mouth and imperfect speech of infancy has in many cases extended the same designation to both conceptions. Thus we have Fr. baver, to slaver, to fumble or falter in speaking, to dally, trifle ; bavarder, to slaver, to babble ; Sw. dial, slabbra (the equivalent of E. slobber), to tattle. In the same way the sense of E. drivel is extended to imbecile talk or action. Sw. drafwel, nonsense, idle talk ; Sw. dial. dravla, drovla, to talk confusedly and unintelligibly, to talk nonsense.

To Drizzle. As G. rieseln, grieseln. Da. drasle, to fall with a rustling or pattering sound. See Dredge.

Droll. Fr. draule, drole, a wag or merry grig.—Cot. Pl.D. draueln, to speak or behave in a childish or foolish manner, to trifle. He drauelt wat, he is joking.—Brem. Wtb. See Drivel.

Dromedary. Gr. δρομεω, to run ; δρομας, -αδος, running ; Lat. dromedarius, a running camel, a swift camel for riding.

Drone. AS. draen, the non-working bee, from the droning or buzzing sound it utters, as G. hummel from hum. ON. drunr, a bellowing, loud hollow noise ; Dan. dræne, to hum, buzz ; dron, din, peal, rumbling noise ; Pl.D. dronen, to sound ; Gael, dranndan, humming, buzzing, growling ; drannd-eun, a humming-bird. The drone of a bagpipe is the pipe that keeps constantly making a droning noise.

To Droop. ON. dryp, driupa, to drip ; driupi, driupa, to droop, hang the head, hence to be sad or troubled ; driupr, suppliant, sad ; to droup or drouk, to dare, or privily be hid.—Pr. Pm. See Drop.

Drop.—Droop.—Drip. Du. drop, drup, G. tropfen, ON. dropi, a drop ; driupa, Du. druppen, druypen, druppe-len, G. triefeln, to drip, or fall in drops. In Lith. the root drib has the sense of hanging. Dryboti, to hang to something, hang down ; dribti, to hang, to drip (of viscous fluids), to fall as snow, to dribble ; nudribti, to hang down, to droop (of a sick person who cannot hold himself up) ; nudribbusos ausys, drooping ears ; pa-dribbusos akys, dripping eyes.

Dropsy. Fr. hydropisie, Lat. hydrops, from υδωρ, water.

Dross. In general the dregs or refuse of anything ; drosse or fylthe whereof it be, ruscum ; coralle or drasse of corne, acus—Pr. Pm. ; dross-wheat, refuse wheat for the swine.—Way. AS. dros, Du. droes, droessem, dregs, filth. Sw. dial, drosan, awns, chaff ; ON. tros, offal, refuse ; Sc. drush, atoms, fragments. The radical sense is probably offal, what falls off, from Goth, driusan, AS. dreosan, to fall, as Da. affald af metal, the dross or scum of metals.

Drought. AS. druguth, Du. drooghte, Sc. drouth, from AS. dryg, Du. droogh, dry.

To Drown. See Drink.

* Drowsy. Du. droosen, Pl.D. drus-seln (Danneil), to doze, slumber. It has been shown under Drawl that slowness of action is expressed by the figure of dribbling, letting fall bit by bit. In the present case we find Sw. dial. drosa, drasa, drosa, drosla, to dribble, trickle, and drosa, drasa, drosla, Dan. drose, Pl.D. drieseln, Du. treuzelen, to linger, loiter, be slow in action ; Sw. dial. drasi, drasug, drdsog, slow, inactive, from whence to the notion of drowsiness is a small step. Sw. dial. dräuld, to be sloth-ful, to sleep with sloth ; Du. druilen, to loiter, to slumber.

To Drub. E. dial, drab, to beat ; Bohem. drbati, to rub, to give a sound beating ; drbnauti, to give a blow. G. derb, hard, rough ; derbe schläge, hard blows.

Drudge. To drug, to drag, to do laborious work.
At the gate he proffered his service To drugge and draw, what so men wold devise.
Chaucer.
Richt ernestly they wirk, And for to drug and draw wald never irk.—D. V.
Ir. drugaire, a slave, or drudge. Manx drug, a dray ; N. drag, a place where, or a short sledge on which timber is dragged ; droga, a load of wood or hay dragged by hand.—Aasen. E. dial, drug, a timber waggon ; drugeous, huge.—Hal. Drugeon, strong laborious worker (femme ou fille). 'Notre Josette est un vrai drugeon.'—Gloss. Génév. We may compare Dan. slæbe, to drag, to trail, and also to toil or drudge.

Drug. I. Fr. drogue. Du. drooghe waere, droogh kruyd, pharmaca, aromata, from their hot, dry nature, drying up the body.—Kil. A more likely origin is the It. treggea, Sp. dragea, Mod.Gr. τραγαλα, τράγημα, sweetmeats. Fr. dragée, a kind of digestive powder prescribed unto weak stomachs after meat, and hence any jonkets, comfits, or sweetmeats, served in the last course for stomach closers.—Cot. Articles of such a nature seem to have been the principal store of the druggist or apothecary.

Boxis he bare with fine electuares, And sugrid siropes for digestion, Spicis belonging to the potiquares, With many wholesome swete confection.
Test. Creseide, 250.

Full redy hadde he his apothecaries, To send him dragges, and his lettuaries.
Chaucer.

2. Drug is also used in the sense of refuse, trash, dregs. Sw. wrak, drug, refuse, trash.—Widegren. In this sense it is a modification of dreg. Comp. Du. drabbe, dregs, with E. drubby, muddy.—Hal. ON. grubb, grugg, dregs.

Drum. I. From an imitation of the sound. G. trommel.

The whistling pipe and drumbling tabor.
Drayton in R.

ON. thruma, thunder; thrumketil, æs tinniens. Dan. drum, a booming sound. Ptg. trom, sound of cannon.

2. An evening party, from the figure of a recruiting sergeant enlisting by sound of drum. 'Lady Cowper is to have a magnificent lighting up of her fine room on the 9th. She has beat the drum, and volunteers will flock in, though she seemed distressed for want of Macaronies.'—Mrs Delany, 2nd Series, II. p. 156, A.D. 1775.

Dry. AS. drig, Du. droog, G. trocken, ON. thurr, Dan. tor.

Dryad. Gr. δρυάδες, Sylvan nymphs, from δρῦς, a tree, an oak.

Dual. Lat. dualis (duo, two), of or relating to two.

Dub. A small pool of rain-water, puddle, gutter.—Jam. Fris. dobbe, a puddle, swamp. See Dip.

To Dub. The origin of the expression of dubbing a knight has been much canvassed, and it has been plausibly explained from the accolade or blow on the neck with the sword which marked the conclusion of the ceremony. ON. dubba, to strike; Fr. dauber, dober, to beat, swinge, canvass thoroughly.—Cot. But the accolade was never anything but a slight tap, and it is very unlikely that it should have been designated by a term signifying a sound beating. Nor have we far to seek for the real origin. The principal part of the ceremony of dubbing a knight consisted in investing him with the habiliments of his order, putting on his arms, buckling on his sword and his spurs. Now in all the Romance languages is found a verb corresponding to the E. dub, signifying to arrange, dress, prepare, fit for some special purpose. Prov. adobar, to arrange, prepare, dress victuals. Fr. douber, to rig or trim a ship; addouber, to dress, set fitly together, arm at all points.—Cot.

La dame s'est moult tot armée Et com chevalier adoubée.
Fab. et Contes, vi. 291.

Cat. adobar, to repair, dress leather, dress or manure land; Sp. adobar, to dress or make anything up, cook meat, pickle pork, tan hides; adobo, dressing of any kind, as paint for the face, pickle, or sauce, ingredients for dressing leather; E. to dub cloth, to dress it with teasels; to dub a cock, to prepare it for fighting by cutting off its comb and wattles; dubbing, a dressing of flour and water used by weavers, a mixture of tallow for dressing leather.

The origin is preserved in Sclavonic. Bohem. dub, an oak, oakbark, tan; dubiti, to tan; Lith. dubas, tan; dobai, dobbai, tanners' lie. From the image of tanning leather the term seems to have been extended to any kind of dressing.

Dubious. See Doubt.

-duce, -duct.—Ductile. Lat. duco, ductum, to lead, draw. Hence Induce, Conduce, Deduce, Reduce, Conduct, &c. Ductile, what may be drawn out.

Duck. Du. duycken, to bow the head, and especially to sink it under water, to dive. G. tauchen, Sw. dyka, to dive; Bav. ducken, to press down; duck machen, to let the head sink; duckeln, to go about with the head sunk. The change of the final guttural for a labial gives a series of parallel forms, Du. duypen, to stoop the head, go submissively; G. taufen, to baptise; E. dip, dive.

Duck, the bird, is so called from the habit of diving, as Lat. mergus, from mergere. Du. duycker, G. tauch-ente, Bav. duck-antl, the dob-chick.

Dud. A rag; duds, clothing; dod, a rag of cloth.—Hal. It is shown under Hater that the term for 'a rag' is commonly taken from the image of 'something hanging or shaking in the wind.' So from Bav. tateren, to shiver, we have taterman, a scarecrow, a figure dressed in shaking rags, E. tatter, a rag; from Swiss lodelen, to shake, to be loose, loden, a rag; from hudeln, to waver, dangle, hudel, a rag; from Fr. driller, to twinkle, drilles, tatters. In like manner we pass from E. dodder, dudder, to tremble, shiver (Hal.), to dod or dud, a rag. And as an initial d and j frequently interchange, we have W.E. jouder, to chatter with cold, jouds, rags. G. zote (provincially zode), a lock, rag, tatter. 'Hans in saner zode.' Hans in his rags.—Deutsch. Mund. II. 408. Pl.D. tadder, taddel, zadder, rags.—Danneil.
Dudgeon. 1. The root of box-wood. 2. Ill-will.
Due.—Duty. Lat. debere, It. dovere, OFr. deuvre, of which last the participle at one time was probably deuU, corresponding to It. dovuto, duty, right, equity'—Fl., afterwards contracted to deu, and mod. du, due.
Dug. A teat. Sw. dagga, to give suck. See Dairy.
Duke.—Duchess. Fr. duc, duchesse, from Lat. dux, ducis, a leader; duco, to lead.
Dull. Ineffective for the purpose aimed at, wanting in life. A dull edge is one that will not cut; a dull understanding, does not readily apprehend; a dull day is wanting in light, the element which constitutes its life; dull of sight or of hearing is ineffective in respect of those faculties.
The sense may be explained from the figure of wandering or straying from the mark. Du. dolen, dwaelen, AS. dwolian, to stray, to wander; Pl.D. dwalen, dweelen, twalen, to wander either physically or figuratively, to err in judgment, act or talk foolishly; E. dial. dwaule, dwallee, to wander in mind, to talk incoherently as one in delirium; Du. dol, dul, G. toll, mad, out of one's mind; Goth. dvals, foolish; Dan. dval, spiritless, torpid. ON. dvali, N. and Dan. dvale, stupor, trance, fainting, doze, sleep.
The word seems a parallel form with Fr. fol, fool, which is connected in a similar manner with OFr. folier, to err, and, like dull, is often applied to what fails to perform its apparent purpose. Thus avoine folle is wild or barren oats. Fr. feu-follet, AS. fon-fyr (fon, fool), the ignis fatuus, ineffectual fire or fire without heat, corresponds to Du. dwaal-licht, the false light or wandering light. Fr. fol-persil, fool's parsley (properly fool-parsley), corresponds to Du. dolle-kervel (dull chervil), false chervil. On the same principle the name of dolle-besien is given to the poisonous berries of deadly nightshade.
DUMP Perhaps the sense of error may be traced at an earlier period to the notion of twisting or turning. Du. dwaelinge in 't waeter, a whirlpool.—Kil. A madman is one of perverted or twisted understanding. And so from Pl.D. dwars, dwas, athwart, oblique, we pass to Du. dwaes, foolish, mad, and Da. dvas (of liquors), lifeless, flat. Du. dwaes-licht, synonymous with dwaal-licht, ignis fatuus. Now as the r of dwars is lost in dwaes, dvas, may not dwaelen or dwalen, to turn, be from Du. dwarlen (in dwarlwind, a whirlwind), to twirl or whirl? It would however render this derivation unlikely if dull was to be identified with Gael. dall, blind, dark in colour, Bret. dall, blind, blunt.
Dumb. Goth. daubs, deaf, hardened, dull; afdaubnan, to become obtuse, to grow dull; afdobnan, afdumbnan, to hold one's peace; dumbs, dumb; ON. dumbi, dumb, dark of colour; dumbungr, thickness of the air, covered weather; dumina, to be still. G. dumm was formerly applied in general to whatever was wanting in its proper life or activity, as to food that has lost its savour, to a limb that has lost its feeling, to the loss of hearing (Sanders), but now it is used in the sense of stupid, dull of understanding, while stumm is dumb; dumpf, what has its energy compressed, kept down, confined; dull, actively or passively; unsavoury. Du. dom, deaf, blunt, dull, stupid; dom en blend, deaf and blind; domsinnigh, mad.—Kil. Da. dum, dumb, dim, obscure, dull, low in sound, stupid, foolish. Sw. dum, stupid; dumb, dumb. Esthon. tum, dumb, dark; tumme, dull, dark, thick; tuim, without feeling, benumbed, unsavoury. See Dim, Dump, Deaf, Dam.
Dump.—Dumpy.—Dumpling. Da. dial. dubbet, E. dial. dubby, dumpy, short and thick; dumphead (Whitby GL), a tadpole; Du. dompneus, snubnose, a short stumpy nose; E. humpty-dumpty, a short thick person; dumpling, a round ball of paste. The radical image (as in Stub, Stump) is probably an impulse abruptly stopped, whence the notion of a short blunt projection. E. dial. dub, a blow; Sw. dubb, a plug, peg; E. dial. dump, to knock heavily, to stump; Sw. dial. dompa, to knock, to fall heavily, to stump or tread heavily; ON. dumpa, Da. dompe, to plump, fall suddenly to the ground or into water. Da. dial. dubbe, to stop, to wait. 'Dub e lidt,' step a bit. The idea of something suddenly stopped in its course, checked in its development or powers, confined, restrained, is figura- tively carried out in numerous forms in- dicated under Dumb.
Dump. 2. The application of this term to an affection of the mind is a part of the medical theory which attri- buted all disorders of the frame to a hu- mour falling on the part affected, and regarded mental disorders especially as produced by a vapour rising from the stomach into the brain. Du. damp, damp, a vapour; damp int de mage, vapidus fumus ex ventriculo in cerebrum erumpens.—Bigl. Hence E. dumps, me- lancholy, fixed sadness.—B. In the same sense was formerly used the equiva- lent vapours, from the Fr. vapeurs, une certaine maladie dont l'effet est de rendre melancholique.—Trevoux.
Dump was used in a general sense synonymous with humour for the condi- tion of the mind :— By 'r ladie 'ch am not very glad to see her in this dumpe.—Gammer Gurton I. x. 3; in this humour.
Also for an air or strain of music, re- garded as an inspiration into the brain of the composer. In this sense we meet with the expression of ' a merry dump.'
Dun. Dark in colour. And white things woxen dimme and donne. Ch. in R.
From the notion of shutting up, covering, obscuring. AS. steorran dunniath, stellæ obscurantur. Gael. duin, to shut, close; donn, brown; Manx doon, to shut up, close, darken; doon, a field, a close, the equivalent of E. town and of G. zaun, a hedge. The connection between the ideas of covering and darkness is a very natural one. Sp. tapar, to stop up, hood- wink, cover; tapetado, of a dark brown or blackish colour; Ptg. tapar, to stop up, cover, inclose; taparse, to darken, grow dark.—Vieira.
To Dun. To make a droning sound. Dunnyn in sownd, bundo. Dunnynge of sownde, bunda, bombus.—Pr. Pm. Hence to dun, to demand a debt clamor- ously. In like manner from hum, a humming sound, hum-bailiff, a bailiff employed to dun for a debt, and incident- ally to arrest the debtor. Sw. dona, duna, to resound; w. dwn, a murmur, the bass in music.
Dunce. The Scotists, or divines of the school of Duns Scotus, were called Duns- men or Duncemen, and their teaching duncery.
DUNGEON Now would Aristotle deny such speaking, and a Duns man would make twenty distinctions.— Tyndall in R. Here you come with your fine and logical distinctions, and bring in the causes essential and accidental of marriage, as though we were in a school of duncery, and not in a discourse of pleasure.—Milton in Todd.
Hence to dunce upon, to puzzle upon, or too much to beat the brains upon.— Cot. in v. metagraboliser. When the progress of the Reformation brought the schoolmen into disrepute, the name of Duns, by which their learning was dis- tinguished, became a term of opprobrium, and at last was used as synonymous with blockhead.
They hate even to death all them that preach the pure word of God, void of all the dregges of Dunsse learning and mans traditions.—Confuta- tion of N. Shaxton, 1546, in Todd. Remember ye not within this twenty yeares and far less, and yet dureth unto this day, the old barking curres Dunce's disciples, and like draffe called Scotists, the children of darkness raved against Greek, Latin, and Hebrew.—Tyndall in R.
Dunch. Dunche or hunche, sonitus, strepitus, bundum, bombus. Dunchyn or bunchyn, tundo; dunchinge or lunchinge, tuncio, percussio.—Pr. Pm. Dan. dundse, to thump. Lat. tundere. Let. dunksch represents the sound of a blow with the fist; dunkschkis, a blow with the fist.
Dung. G. dung, dünger, Sw. dynga, dung, muck, manure. The original mean- ing, like that of muck, seems to be simply wet. Dan. dygge, dugge, to sprinkle with water; dyg-vaad, dyng-vaad, wringing wet, as wet as muck; dung, thoroughly wet.—Moth. But it may be from Dan. dynge, a heap. Comp. ON. hruga, a heap, N. ruga, a lump, especially a lump of dung. Kuruga, a cowdung. In Swabian hoppen, a heap, and in children's language hoppe machen, to do his business.— Schmid. Bohem. kopec, heap; kopciti, to heap up; kopcina, filth, dirt, sweepings.
Dungeon.—Donjon. Originally the principal building of a district, or fortress, which from its position or structure had the command of the rest, from the Lat. dominio, domnio (as domnus or dominus), domgio, dongeo (as Fr. songer from som- niari), donjon. In a charter A.D. 1179, given by Muratori, is an agreement 'quod de summitate Castri Veteris quæ Don- gionem appellatur prædictus episcopus ejusque successores debeant habere duas partes ipsius summitatis, scilicet ab uno latere usque ad vineam episcopi et ab al- tera usque ad flumen,' showing that in this case the dominio was mere open ground. In general however it was ap- plied to a tower or other work of defence.

' Milites ocyus conscenso Domnione, domo scilicet principali et defensiva.'—Duc.
Desus le plus maistre dunjon Drescnt le reial gonfanon. Chron. Norm. 2. 820.
Donjon in fortification is generally taken for a large tower or redoubt of a fortress, where the garrison may retreat in case of necessity.—Bailey. The name of Dungeon has finally been bequeathed to such an underground prison as was formerly placed in the strongest part of a fortress.
Duodecimal. Lat. duodecim, twelve.
To Dup. To do up, as doff and don, to do off and do on. Swiss tuffen, to open, as a door or a letter.
Dupe. Fr. dupe, one who lets himself be deceived. From dupe, duppe, a hoopoe, from some tradition of the habits of that bird of which we are ignorant. Thus from It. bubbola, a hoopoe, bubbolare (portar via con inganno), to cheat—Al-tieri, whence E. to bubble one. Pol. dudek, a hoopoe, also a simpleton, a fool. Wystrychnai na dudka, to make a fool of one. Bret. houpérik, a hoopoe, also a dupe ; houperiga, to deceive, to dupe.—Legon.
Duplicate. See Double.
Duration. Lat. durare, to last, durus, hard. Gr. δύραζ, lasting, enduring. Turk. durmak, to continue, stay, endure.
Dusky. Lifeless, without animation, dim in colour, obscure.
The pennons and the pomels and the poyntes of shields Withdrawen his devocion and dusken his hert. P.P.—they dull or blunt his religious feelings.
The ground stude barrane, widderit, dosk and gray, Herbis, flowris and gerssis wallowit away.—D.V.
Perhaps from dull through the forms dulsk, or dolsk, dorsk, dosk. Dan. dial. dulsk, dolsk, dull, lifeless, loitering ; Sw. dial. dalsk, lazy, slow ; Dan. dorsk, indo-lent, sluggish, dull, torpid ; ON. doska, to dawdle, delay.
Dust. ON. dust, Gael. dus, duslach, dust. Du. donst, vapour, down, flour, dust ; G. dunst, vapour, exhalation, dust-shot. See Down.
Dwale. Deadly nightshade, a plant whose berries produce stupefaction and death. Dan. dvale, stupefaction ; dvale-drik, soporific ; dvale-bær, stupefaction-berries, dwale.—See Dull.
Dwalm.—Dwaum. A fainting-fit ; OHG. dualm, torpor, insensibility ; Du. bedwelmen, to become dizzy, to faint.
From Goth. dvals, foolish, ON. dvali, stupor, fainting, doze, as Da. dial. dulme, to grow dull, subside, slumber, doze, from the same root. Solen dulmer, the sun is obscured ; ilden dulmer, the fire burns dull. See Dull.
Dwarf. AS. dweorg, dweorh, ON. dvergr, Sw. dwerg, dwerf, G. zwerg, zwergel.
To Dwell. Dan. dvale, torpor, suspended life ; dvæle, to dwell, linger, loiter. ON. dvelja, to detain, delay, to stay ; OSw. dvala, torpor, delay ; dvælia, to stay, wait, tarry ; Sw. dväljas, to dwell ; MHG. twalen, to be torpid ; twelen, to stop, to abide, dwell.
To Dwindle. AS. dwinan, Pl.D. dwanen (Bosworth in v. wanian), to fade, waste away, vanish ; E. dial. dwain, dwainy, faint, sickly.—Forby. Du. verswînen, verdwiinen, to fade, perish ; Bav. schweinen, G. schwinden, to shrink, waste away, wane. ' Der mane wahsit unde swinit,' the moon waxes and wanes.—Diutiska in Schmeller. ON. dvina, to diminish, to leave off ; Sw. twina, to pine away, languish, dwindle ; Dan. tvine, to pine away, also to whine or whimper. In the last of these we probably touch the origin of the word. A languishing or weakly condition of body is naturally expressed by reference to the whining, pipy tone of voice induced by illness. Thus a person says he is rather pipy, meaning poorly. The Pl.D. has quakken, to groan or complain like a sick person, whence Dan. dial. quak, poorly. Du. queksen, to complain, to groan, to be poorly.—Kil. In like manner Goth. cwainon, w. cwyno, to bewail, complain, grieve ; Pl.D. quinen, to complain, to be poorly, languish, waste away ; ON. queina, veina, to bemoan oneself; AS. cwanian, wanian, to mourn, faint, languish.
To Dye. See To Die. 2.
Dynamic.—Dynasty. Gr. δύναμις, the condition of being able, power ; δυνατός, mighty ; δυνάστης, one possessing might or power ; δυναστεία, power, the power of the chief magistrate.
Dysentery. Gr. δυσεντερία, from δυσ, ill, and ἔντερα, the entrails.
Dyspeptic. Gr. δυσπεψία, difficulty of digestion, δυσ, ill, and πέπτω, to dress food, or digest it.

E. See Ex-.
Each. AS. ælc, Pl.D. elk, Du. jeg-helijck, OHG. eocowelih (Kero), each, every, from æ, je, ever, and lic, ghelijck, like. For the contraction of the final element compare which and such with Goth. hvileiks, svaleiks. The AS. æg, Sw. æ or e, in composition, OHG. eo, G. je, express universality or continuity of existence, and may commonly be translated ever. AS. æghwa, whoever, every one; æghwanon, every whence, from all sides; æghwather, ægther, every of two, either, each. Sw. ænår, when; enår, whenever; eho, who-ever. Æ so lange han lifer, so long as he lives; som æ gull sæi, as if it were all gold.—Ihre. OHG. eo so wanne, when-soever.

Eager. 1. Fr. aigre, eager, sharp, biting; Lat. acer, sharp, severe, vehe- ment, ardent. See Acid.
2. Egre. The bore in certain rivers. See Higre.
Eagle. Fr. aigle, Lat. aquila.
Ear. 1. The organ of hearing. Lat. auris, Lith. ausis, Goth. auso, ON. eyra, G. ohr.
2. A head of corn. Goth. ahs, OHG. ahir, AS. æchir, ear, G. ähre, Du. adere, ære.
To Ear. To plough. Eryyn londe, aro.—Pr. Pm. AS. earian, Du. eren, er- rien, Gr. ἀρόω, Lat. arare, to plough.
Earl. ON. iarl, princeps, prorex, comes.—Gudm. Gael. iarfhlath (pronounced iarla, the fh and th being silent), a de- pendant chief, from iar, after, second in order, and flath, lord, prince. W. ar- glwydd. Corn. arluth, lord.
Early. AS. ær, before; æra, ancient, early; ærlice, ærlice, early. Fris. ader, aderlek, aarle, early. AS. ædre, quick, immediately. ON. æðr, before.
To Earn. 1. To get by labour. As gain, from OFr. gaagner, to cultivate or till, so to earn seems to be to reap the fruits of one's labour, from Du. arne, erne, harvest, arnen, ernen, to reap.— Kil. Bav. arn, arnet, G. ernte, harvest; arnari, messor.—Tatian. Bav. arnen, erarnen, g'arnen, to earn, to receive as reward of one's labour. Goth. asans, harvest; asneis, hired labourer, earner.
2. To thrill or tremble. Frissoner, to tremble, shiver, earn through cold or fear.—Cot. See Yearn.
Earnest. 1. What is done with a will, with hearty endeavour to attain the end aimed at. G., Du. ernst. Du. ernsten, to endeavour.—Kil. AS. georn, desirous, eager, intent; georne, earnestly. Herodes befran hi georne, Herod asked them dili- gently. He geornor wolde sibbe, he more earnestly desired peace. Swa mon georn- est mæg, as man with his best endeavour may. Geornlic, geornful, diligent, intent.
G. gern, Du. gheern, willingly, N. girug, desirous, also diligent at work. See Yearn.
* 2. Money given in hand to assure a bargain. Lat. arrha, OFr. arres, ernes, W. ern, ernes. Gael. earlas, Sc. arles, arlis-penny, airle-penny. The word seems to admit of explanation as caution-money, from Gael. earal, provision, caution; earalas, precaution, foresight, provision.
Earth. Goth. airtha, ON. jörð, G. erde. The Promptorium has 'erye, of earth,' agreeing with OHG. ero, Gr. ἔρα in ἔραζε, to the ground.
Earwig. An insect named in most European languages from being supposed to lodge itself in the ear. Fr. perce-oreille, Sw. or-matk (matk, worm, insect), G. ohren-hohler, ohr-wurm, &c. The second part of the word is the AS. wigga, a parallel form with wibba, a creeping thing. AS. scearnwibba, a dung- beetle; E. dial. oak-web, a cockchafer.
The two forms are seen in Lith. wabalas (identical with E. weevil), a beetle, and Esthon. waggel, a worm, grub, the last of which may be compared with erri- wiggle, a provincial name of the earwig, and poll-wiggle, a tadpole, a creature consisting of a large poll or head, with- out other body, and a tail. As wabalas, wibba, are from the form shown in E. wabble, G. waben, weben, wibbeln, so waggel, wiggle, wigga, belong to the parallel form waggle, wiggle, indicating in like manner multifarious movement. See Weevil, Worm.
Ease.—Easy. Fr. aise. It. asio, agio, Ptg. azo, convenience, opportunity, lei- sure. The Romance languages probably received it from a Celtic source; Gael. eubh, prosperity, adhais, athais, leisure, ease, prosperity; Bret. éaz, ez, convenience, ease; diez, difficult, dieza, to incommode; W. haws, ease, hawdd, easy. The same root may be recognized in Lat. *otium*, leisure, AS. *eath*, easy, gentle (whence OE. *uneth*, hardly), *ead*, prosperity, possession, and *eadig*, happy (Gael. *adhach*, prosperous, happy), ON. *audr*, wealth, *audugr*, wealthy, while *aud* in composition signifies easily done; *aud-brotinn*, -*beygdr*, &c., easily broken, bent, &c. The transition to the notion of wealth is also found in It. *agiato*, at ease, also wealthy, able to live in good plight, also (= Lat. *otiosus*) lazy.—Fl. The fundamental idea seems to be empty, vacant, what affords room or facility for anything to take place, then riches as affording the most general of all facilities. ON. *audr*, empty, void; *undir audum himni*, under the open sky; *aud-synn*, open to view, easily seen. Compare also AS. *æmetta*, leisure, *æmtig*, empty, vacant; Lat. *vacuus*, empty, Fr. *vacant*, empty, at leisure.—Cot.

Easel. G. *esel*, an ass; *Maler-esel*, a painter's easel or support for the painting at which he works. On the same principle it is called in Fr. *chevalet*, a little horse. See Pulley.

* East. G. *ost*, ON. *aust*. The origin of the name seems preserved in Esthon., which has *ea*, ice, forming in the ablative *east*, from the ice, while the same word signifies the East wind; pointing to the N. of Europe for the origin of the term, where the East is the icy wind. *Idda*, or *Ea*, North-east; *Idda-tuul*, or *Iddast*, the E. or N.E. wind. In the same language *wessi*, water; *wessi-kaar* (*kaar* = quarter), the west or wet quarter; *wessi-tuul* (the wet wind), the N.W. wind. On the other hand East is explained from Lith. *auszra*, the dawn; *auszti*, to dawn; Sanscr. *uschdschd* (in comp.), dawn, from the root *usch*, Lat. *urere*, *ustum*, to burn. Lith. *auszrinne*, the morning star; *auszrinnis*, the N.N.E. wind.

Easter. According to Bede the name is derived from AS. *Eostra*, OSw. *Astar-gydia*, the goddess of love (ON. *ast*, love), whose festival was held in the month of April, thence called *Eoster-monath*. The reasons for doubting the authority of Bede upon such a point are very slight, the main objection instanced by Adelung being the unlikelihood that the name of a Pagan deity should be transferred to a Christian feast. But the same thing seems to have taken place with the term Yule, which from designating the midwinter feast of the Pagans was transferred to the Christian feast of the Nativity.

Eat. Goth. *itan*, G. *essen*, Lat. *edere*.

Eath. —Easy. See Ease.

Eaves. AS. *efese*, margin, edge; *efe-sian*, to shave, to trim. *Orcheyarde and erberes efesyd yie dene*.—P. P. Goth. *ubizva*, OHG. *obisa*, *opasa*, Bav. *obse*, a portico, hall; ODu. *ovese*, Fris. *ose*, eaves, as N. of England *casings* for *evesings*. ON. *ups*, *eaves*, *upsar-dropi*, Du. *oos-druip*, eaves-dropping.

Ebb. G., Du. *ebbe*, the falling back of the tide. G. *aben*, to fall off, to sink. See Evening.

Ecclesiastic. Gr. *ἐκκλησία*, an assembly of the people summoned by the crier, convocation, church. From *ἐκκαλέω*, to call forth.

Echo. *Ἠχώ*; *ἦχος*, a sound, noise.

Eclipse. Gr. *ἔκλειψις*, a defect or failing in the light of the sun or moon; *ἐκλείπω*, to leave off, to faint, to fail.

Economy. Gr. *οἰκονομία*, domestic management, administration, from *οἶκος*, a house, family, goods, and *νέμω*, to dispense, manage.

Ecstasy. Gr. *στάσις*, a setting, placing; *ἔκστασις*, removal from its wonted position, of a thing; supersedure of the mental functions.

Eddish.—Eddige. Commonly explained in the sense of aftermath, which gives too confined a signification. The meaning is the pasturage, eatage, or eatable growth of either grass or corn-field. Keep for stock is tolerably plentiful, and the fine spring weather will soon create a good *eddish* in the pastures.—'Times,' Apr. 20, 1857. That after the flax is pulled you get more feed that autumn than from the aftermath of seeds sown with wheat the second year; that the immense eatage obtained from seeds the same year they are sown, and after the flax is pulled, should be added to the value of the flax.—'Economist,' Feb. 1, 1852. Fris. *etten*, *beetten*, to pasture.

Eddy. Commonly referred to an AS. *ed-ea*, back-water (not preserved in the extant remains of the language), from *ed*, equivalent to the Lat. *re* in composition, and *ea*, water. But this plausible derivation is opposed by numerous Norse forms given by Aasen, *ia*, *ida*, *odo*, *udu*, *evja*, *bak-ida*, *bak-wudu*, *kring-wudu*, an eddy, back-water, which leave little doubt that the word is simply the ON. *yða*, a whirlpool, *homyða*, to boil, to rush; AS. *yþ*, wave, flood, rush of water; *yþian*, to fluctuate, to overflow.

Edge. AS. *ecge*, ON. *egg*, Lat. *acies*.

edge, Gr. ἀκή, a point, edge. Du. egghe, an angle, edge, corner; G. ecke, a corner.
Edible. Lat. edo, to eat.
Edify.—Edifice. Lat. ædifico, to build a house (ædes, a house, facio, to make), Fr. edifier.
Edit.—Edition. Lat. edo, editum, to give forth or out.
* Eel. Du. aal, ON. áll. Explained from Sanscr. ahi, a snake, analogous to Lat. anguilla, an eel, from anguis, snake, or Gr. ἔγχελυς, eel, from ἔχις, viper.
To Efface. Fr. effacer, Prov. esfassar, to remove the face, to remove an impression.
Effigy. Lat. effigies, an image; fingo, fictum, to form, properly to mould in clay.
Effort. Fr. effort, formerly efforz, effors; s'efforcer, to put his force or strength to a thing.
Eft.—Evet.—Ewt.—Newt. A water-lizard.
In that abbaye ne entereth not no flye ne todes ne ewtes ne suche fowle venymouse bestes.—Mandeville.
Egg. AS. æg, pl. ægru, OE. eyren, eggs. The sound of the final g was some-times softened also in the singular, giving OE. eye, as G. ei, an egg. Gr. ὠόν, Lat. ovum, are radically the same word.
To Egg. ON. egg, an edge; eggia, to sharpen, or give an edge to, and fig. to instigate or set one on to do anything.
* Eglantine. Written by Chaucer eglatere and eglentere, E. Fris. egeltiere, Du. eghelentier, eglentere (Kil.), Fr. aig-lantier, Pr. aguilancier, aiglentina, a wild rose, thorn-bush. Diez' Romance de-rivation from aiguilla, aguilhe, a needle, seems much less probable than that from OFr. egle, AS. egla, ægle, a prick, thorn, splinter. The final element of the word is Du. tere, taere, a tree, as in appeltere, mispeltere, holentere, noteltere; giving the signification of thorn-tree or thorn-bush. From the same source is Du. egel, the prickly animal, a hedgehog.
Egregious. Lat. egregius, chosen out of the herd, excellent; grex, gregis, the flock or herd.
Egret. See Heron.
Eight. Sanscr. astan, Lith. asztuni, Russ. osm, Lat. octo, Goth. ahtan, G. acht, W. wyth, Fr. huit.
Either. The AS. element æg in com-position signifies ever, all, as æghwa, every who, whoever; æghwær, every where; æghwanon, every whence, from all sides. In like manner from hwæther, which of two, æghwæther, ægther, every one of two, each, either. The particle was also united with nouns. Yif æi mon other ei wummon misseith ou, if any man or woman missaith you.—Ancren Riwle, 124.
The particle æg corresponds exactly to Esthon. igga. Lap. ikke; ikke ka, who-ever; ikke kus, wherever; ikke mi, what-ever; Esthon. igga uks, every one; igga paaw, every day, daily; igga, Fin. ika, lifetime, age, time. Lap. hagga, life.
The k of ika is softened to a j (i. e. y) in the genitive ijan, leading us to Sanscr. ayas, Gr. αἰών, Lat. ævum, Goth. aivs, lifetime, age. Fin. ikhawa, Esthon. iggaw, perpetual, enduring; AS. ece, everlasting.
Eke.—To Eke. Goth. auk, ON. og, G. auch, also. Goth. aukan, Lat. augere, Gr. αὐξάνειν, to increase, show the same root.
Elastic. Fr. élastique. The corre-sponding forms are not extant in classical Lat. and Gr., but there is no doubt the word is from Gr. ἐλαύνω, ἐλάσαι, to drive, whence ἐλάστης, a driver.—Etym. Mag. Mod.Gr. ἐλαστός, flexible; ἐλατήριον, a spring as of a lock, &c.
Elbow. AS. elnboga, elboga, the bow or bending of the arm, from an obsolete ell, eln (preserved in AS. ellen, strength, and in E. ell), Gr. ὠλένη, Lat. ulna, the forearm. So Pl.D. knebog, the bending of the knee, the knee.
Eld, Elder. See Old.
Elder, AS. ellarn, Pl.D. elloorn, G. holunder, hollder, OHG. holuntar, holder, the elder-tree, from its hollow wood, the final der, tar, signifying tree, as in AS. appalder, an apple-tree.
Electric. Gr. ἤλεκτρον, amber, the power of amber, when rubbed, to attract light bodies being the fact which first called attention to the electric force.
Electuary. Mid.Lat. electuarium, bar-barously formed from Gr. ἐκλεικτόν, a me-dicine which has to be licked; ἐκλείχω, to lick up.
Eleemosynary. Gr. ἐλεημοσύνη, alms.
Elegant. Lat. elegans, neat, hand-some, delicate.
Elegy. Gr. ἔλεγος, a song of mourn-ing, supposed to be derived from ἐ ἐ λέγειν, to cry woe!
Element. Lat. elementum, a first principle.
Elevate. Lat. elevare, to lift up; levare, to lighten, to lift up; levis, light. See Lift.
Eleven, AS. endleofan, Goth. ainlif, eleven; tvalif, tvalib, twelve. Lith. wenolika, eleven, dwilika, twelve, from wienas, one, dwi, two. The radical identity of the second element in the Goth. and Lith. forms has been generally admitted, in accordance with the analogy of the parallel roots lip and lik, in Gr. λείπω, λιμπάνω, to leave, Goth. laibos, relics, aflifnan, to remain; and in Lat. linquere, lictum, to leave, Lith. likti, to remain over. The sense required for this element is indicated in the Lap. expressions for the same numerals, akta lokke naln, one upon ten, one in excess of ten, two in excess of ten, and so on. But the word for ten might easily be left unexpressed, as it actually is in Fin. yxi toista, eleven, literally, one in the second [ten]. The ellipse is supplied in the expression for twelfth, toinen toista kymmenta, the second in the second ten. The Esthon. uses indifferently the elliptic or the complete expression, üks teist, or üks teist kummen, one in the second, or one in the second ten.

Now Lith. lykus signifies surplus, remainder; lėkas, what remains over, odd, and, in combination with the ordinals first, second, &c., it designates the numbers immediately following ten; pirmas, antras, &c., lėkas, the first, second, &c., excess above ten, i. e. eleven, twelve, and so on. The radical identity of forms like these with the cardinal series, wenolika, dwilika, &c., on the one hand, and on the other with the verbal forms lekmi, likti, to remain over, palikti, to leave behind, cannot be doubted; and having thus traced the meaning of the Lith. termination lika to the idea of surplus expressed by the root of linquere, we have strong analogy for a similar explanation of the termination in Goth. ainlib, ainlif, and E. eleven, from the root of Gr. λείπω, and E. leave. Philolog. Trans. 1857, p. 29.

Elf. AS. ælf, elf, ON. alfr, alfi, G. alp, supernatural beings of the Northern mythology.

Eliminate. Lat. eliminare, to turn out of doors (limen, a threshold), to cast forth.

Elixir. Arab. el-iksîr, the philosopher's stone. From Gr. ξηρόν, ξηρίον, properly a dry medicament.—Dozy.

Ell. The length of a forearm; the forearm taken as a measure of length. Gr. ὠλένη, Lat. ulna, the forearm; Du. el, eln, Fr. aulne, an ell-measure, as cubit, a measure of the same kind, from Lat. cubitus, the forearm.

Ellipsis.—Elliptical. Gr. ἔλλειψις, a leaving out.

Elm. Lat. ulmus, Du. olm, Fr. orme, Bohem. jilm (yilm).

Elope. From ON. hlaupa, Du. loopen, to run, verloopen, to run away from, N. laupast, to run away, escape from home.

Else. AS. elles, otherwise; el (in composition), other, as el-theodig, of another people, foreign; ellend, a foreign land; OFr. el, Gr. ἄλλος, Lat. alius, other.

Emaciate. Lat. emaciare (macies, leanness), to make lean.

Emanate. Lat. emanare, to issue or flow from; manare, to drop, trickle, flow.

Emancipate. Lat. manceps (manu capio), one who takes in hand, a purchaser, owner; mancipium, ownership, property, a slave; mancipare, to give into possession; emancipare, to set free.

Embargo. Sp. embargar, to impede, restrain, to seize by process of law, sequester; embargo, embarrassment, impediment, indigestion, sequestration; Prov. embargar, to embarrass, trouble, hinder; embarc, obstacle, trouble.

Diez' explanation through a supposed imbarricare, from barra, a bolt or bar, is unsatisfactory. The Lang. embragar, to hinder, Prov. embregar, to clog or entangle, point to the probable origin in Prov. brac, mud, It. brago, a bog, puddle, quagmire. A person sticking in the mud before the days of road-making would afford a most familiar image of helpless embarrassment.

Be us tenon embregats, they hold you well entangled (empêtrés). —Raynouard.

Precisely the same metaphor is seen in Sc. laggery, miry; laggerit, bemired, also encumbered, impeded. Also in E. clog, to impede the action of a system by stopping up the acting parts with adhesive matter; Sc. claggit, clogged, loaded with clay (AS. clæg); clag, encumbrance, burden upon property, impediment in the way of the possessor arising from the legal claim of another. G. Kummer signifies as well the mud of the streets as judicial seizure, arrest, sequestration.— Küttn.

* Embarrass. The most obvious type of hindrance is a bar which stops the way to anything. Fr. barre, a bar; barres, exceptions in pleading, hampering the course of one's opponent; donner barres à, to stay the current of.—Cot. Barra, stopped, hindered.—Vocab. de Vaud. Prov. barras, Sc. barras, barrace, a bar, barrier. Ptg. baraço, a cord, halter for hanging; Sp. embarazar, Ptg. embaraçar.

embaragar, Fr. embarrasser, to impede, clog, embarrass.
Embassador. See Ambassador.
Embellish. Fr. embellir, from bel, beau, pleasing to sight.
Ember-days. Days set apart for fasting at the four seasons of the year, viz. on the first Friday in every quarter.—Adelung. From Lat. quatuor tempora, the four seasons, whence G. quatember, a quarter of a year, or a quarterly day, or payment. Hence by further corruption kottember, kottemer, Pl.D. tamper, Sw. tamper-dagar, ymber-dagar, ember or imber days. Quatuor tempora, dye fronfast, vier fronfasten.—Dief. Sup. Embyrday, fastyng day.—Palsgr.
Embers. AS. æmyrian, N. eldmyrja (eld, fire), eimyrja. Dan. emmer, Sw. morja, N. myrja, glowing ashes.
To Embezzle. Properly to conceal, then to make away with property entrusted to a servant by his master.
'I concele, I embesyll a thynge, I kepe a thynge secret.—I embesell, I hyde or consoyle, Je cele. I embesyll a thynge, or put it out of the way, Je substrays. He that embesylleth a thyng intendeth to steale it if he can convoye it clenly.'—Palsgr.
It cannot have anything to do with OFr. besiller, to overturn, destroy, Prov. becilh, destruction, trouble.
Emblem. Gr. ἔμβλημα (from ἐμβάλλω, to put in), Lat. emblema, something let in to another, an ornament, and fig. an ornament of discourse. The word is curiously appropriated in Fr. and E. to a symbolic figure tacked on to some thought or saying which it is meant to illustrate and perfect. Emblème, a picture and short posie expressing some particular conceit.—Cot.
To Emboss. Fr. embosser, to swell or rise in bunches, knobs ; bosse, a bunch or knob ; bosseler, to make a dint in a vessel of metal.
To Embrace. Fr. embrasser. It. imbracciare, to infold in one's arms, from Fr. bras, It. braccia, the arms.
Embrasure. Fr. braser, to slope the edge of a stone, as masons do in windows, &c., for the gaining of light ; ébraser, embraser, the splaying or skewing of the opening of a door or window for such a purpose ; embrasure, the splayed opening of a window or door, and hence the splayed opening in a parapet for a cannon to fire through.
The word is unknown in Sp., or it might be explained from abrazar, to embrace, the opening in the wall being considered as if spreading its arms to embrace those in the inside.

Embrocation. From It. broca, Fr. broc, a jug or pipkin, It. embrocatione, a fomenting or bucketing of the head with waters or other liquor falling upon it in the manner of rain.—Fl.
To Embrue. See Imbrue.
Emendation. Lat. emendare, to correct, or remove blemishes ; menda, a defect, blemish.
Emerald. Fr. émeraude. It. smeraldo, Sp., Port. esmeralda, from Lat. smaragdus, Gr. σμάραγδος.—Scheler.
Emery. Fr. esmeril, emeril, the black hard mineral wherewith iron-works are furbished, an emrod, or emerill stone.—Cot. Gr. σμύρις, -ιδος, Mod.Gr. σμυρίτης, emery ; σμυρίζω, to polish with emery.
In the Romance languages perhaps the word was understood as if derived from merus, pure, whence Prov. mer, mier esmers, pure, fine ; esmerar, to purify, refine. Aissi coma la lima esmera e pura lo fer.—Rayn. As the file cleanses and purifies iron. Limousin eméra, to scour with sand ; Sp. esmerar, to polish, cleanse.
Emetic. Gr. ἐμέω, to vomit.
Emmet.—Ant. AS. æmet, G. ameise, Henneberg emetze, Pl.D. eempte, eemke.—Adelung. From the proverbial industry of the animal ; G. emsig, assiduous, diligent. The AS. æmetta, amta, leisure, rest, and æmtig, vacant, empty, idle, seem to furnish exactly the contrary meaning of what is required for our derivation, but it will be found that leisure and occupation are very constantly expressed by the same word. Thus Lat. opera, work, pains, is sometimes translated time, leisure. Deest mihi opera, I have no leisure. The possession of leisure is an obvious condition for the bestowal of our attention on any given object. We see the connection of the two ideas in Fr. vaquer, to be at leisure, to cease from working, also to attend, apply, bestow time on, bend his study unto.—Cot. Du. moete is rendered by Kilian opera, labor, and also otium, tempus vacuum.
Emolument. Lat. emolumentum, profit acquired through labour ; moliri, to exert oneself.
Empair. Fr. empirer, to make worse ; pis, f. pire, Lat. pejor, worse.
Empeach. To attach or fasten upon one the charge of a criminal accusation. Fr. empescher, empêcher, to hinder, impeach, pester, incumber. Empescher un fief, to seize on a fief, the lord take it into his own possession.—Cot. Prov. empaig, hindrance ; empachar, empaytar, to hinder. Probably direct from the Celtic. Gael. bac, hinder, restrain ; bacail, an obstacle (whence Fr. bacler, to bolt the door) ; ON. bági; difficulty ; baga, to hinder. N. bægja, to stop, to hinder. Lat. repagula, bolts, is probably from the same source. Bret. bac'ha, to confine, imprison ; bac'hein, to disconcert, put out of countenance, to be compared with Sp. empachar, to embarrass, confuse, make ashamed.

Emphasis.—Emphatic. Gr. ἐμφαίνω, to let a thing be seen in ; ἐμφαίνει, ἐμφαίνεται, it is manifest. Hence ἔμφασις, appearance in, significance, the force of an expression. To say a thing with emphasis is to say it with special significance ; emphatic, what is spoken so as to have special significance.

Empire.—Emperor. Fr. empire, empereur, from Lat. imperium, imperator; imperare, to command.

Empiric. Gr. ἐμπειρικός, of one who acts on the results of experience, as opposed to the leadings of science. ἐμπειρία, experience.

To Employ. Fr. employer, It. impiegare, from Lat. plicare, to fold or bend, as G. anwenden, to employ, make use of, from wenden, to turn. To turn to a certain purpose. See Ply.

Emporium. Gr. ἐμπόριον, a mart, place of trade ; ἔμπορος, a traveller, a merchant; ἐμπορεύομαι, to be on a journey, to traffic, trade.

Empty. See Emmet.

Emulate.—Emulous. Lat. æmulus, one who seeks to equal or outdo a rival.

En-, before a labial, Em-. Gr. ἐν, Lat. in, Fr. en, in.

Enamel. Fr. esmail, émail, amel or enamel.—Cot. Ammel for goldsmiths, esmail.—Palsgr. It. smalto, G. schmelz, schmelz-glas, smalt, colours produced by the melting of glass with a metallic oxide. G. schmelzen, to melt. It. smaltare, Sp. esmaltar, to enamel. Perhaps the loss of the final t in Fr. esmailler has arisen from the influence of Du. maelen, to paint ; maeler van glas, encaustes ; maelerie, maelie, encaustum, enamel ; maeldren, to enamel.—Kil.

Enchant. Fr. enchanter, from Lat. incantare, to sing magic songs.

Encomium.—Encomiast. Gr. κῶμος, a festivity, festive procession, ode sung on such an occasion ; τὸ ἐγκώμιον (ἔπος), the chant sung on convoying a victor, a laudatory ode.

To Encroach. Fr. accrocher, to hook on to, from croc, a hook.

To Encumber. See Comber.

End. Goth. andeis, Sanscr. anta, end, death.

Endeavour. To endeavour is to make it our duty to do a thing. Fr. se mettre en devoir de, se disposer a faire quelque chose.—Gattel.

We put him in devoir at all times when he might have a leyser, which was but startemele, to translate diverse books out of French into English.—Ames of Printing, cited by Holloway.

To Endorse. Fr. dousser (Cot.), endosser, to back a bill, to give it the support of our credit by writing our name on the back. Lat. dorsum, Fr. dos, the back.

To Endow. From Lat. dos, dotis, Fr. dot, a marriage gift ; doti, doui, indued or endowed with ; douer, to give a dowry unto.—Cot. An internal d or t is frequently converted into a u in Fr., as It. vedova, OFr. vedve, Fr. veuve, a widow.

Endue. Often treated as a corruption of endow; but it is sometimes clearly from Lat. induere, to clothe.
Thou losel base, That hast with borrowed plumes thyself endewed.
F. Q. in R.
Sometimes there may be a confusion with imbue.

Enemy. Fr. ennemi, Lat. inimicus, from in, negative, and amare, to love.

Energy. Gr. ἐνέργεια, from ἐν and ἔργον, an action.

Engine. Lat. ingenium, innate, or natural quality, mental capacity, invention, clever thought ; It. ingegno, Prov. engeinh, Fr. engin, contrivance, craft. Mieux vaut engin que force, better be wise than strong.—Cot. The term was then applied, like Gr. μηχανή, to any mechanical contrivance for executing a purpose, and specially to machines of war. See Artillery.

To Engross. 1. Fr. grossoyer, to write fair, or in great (Fr. gros) and fair letters.—Cot. Opposed to the minute or small characters of the original draught, hence called minutes of a proceeding.

Fr. grosse, Du. gros, a notarial copy. Le notaire garde la minute et en delivre la grosse, keeps the minutes and delivers the engrossed copy.—P. Marin.

2. In the earlier period of our history the engrossing of commodities was regarded as an odious social offence, and was jealously guarded against by the municipal law. The meaning of the word is explained by Blackstone as 'the getting into our possession, or buying up, large quantities of corn, or other dead victuals.' 'I grosse, I take or hepe up thynges a great, Je engrosse. This man grosseth up all the market.'—Palsgr. Perhaps also the offence was what was considered an unfair engrossing or enhancing of the price by buying up what would otherwise have been brought to market by the producers themselves. Fr. engrossir, to greaten, increase, enlarge.—Cot.
To Enhance. From Lat. ante, before, in antea, en avant, forwards, were formed Prov. anz, ans, before, enant, enans, forwards, and thence enansar, to put forwards, to advance, exalt, enhance.
Enigma. Gr. αινιγμα, a dark saying, riddle ; αινισσομαι, to hint at, to speak in riddles.
Ennui. See Annoy.
Enormous. Lat. enormis (e and norma, a rule), irregular, exceeding proportion.
Enough. Goth. binauhan, to be bound, to have it incumbent upon one, to be lawful ; ganauhan, to suffice, ganohs, enough, sufficient ; ganohjan, to satisfy. ON. nogr, gnogr, abundant ; nægia, to suffice ; G. genug, Du. noeg, genoeg, enough ; genoegen, to please, to satisfy.—Kil.
Ensample. Sp. enxiemplo (Ticknor), OFr. ensample, from exemplum, as Ptg. enxame, from examen, Sp. ensayo, an essay, from exagium.
Trestut le mond enlumina Par le sample qu'il nus donna Pur nus garir.
Benoit, Vie de St Thomas, 1199.
In the Harl. MS. ensample.
Ensign. It. insegna, Fr. enseigne, a distinctive mark, from Lat. insignia, pl. of insigne.—Diez. It also signified the distinctive cry which was used in battle to encourage the troops on different sides. Thus Deus aie ! God help ! was the cry of Normandy, while those of several adjacent provinces are mentioned by Benoit in his account of a battle between the confederate princes and Duke Richard.
Munjoie ! escrient si Franceis, E Passavant ! Tiebaut de Bleis, Valie ! crient tuit enfin Quens Geofrei e si Angevin, Baudoin e Flamenc, Arraz !
Chron. Norm. vol. ii. 215.
Among chiefs of inferior consequence the name of each feudal lord was shouted out to rally his own band of retainers.
Quant ces unt ja crié l'enseigne de Vedsci, E, Glanville chevaliers ! e, Baillol ! autresi, Odinel de Umfravile relevad le suen cri.
Chron. Fantosme.
Than mycht men her enseynyeis cry, And Scottis men cry hardely, On thaim ! On thaim ! On thaim ! they faile.
Bruce, ix. 385.
To Ensue. OFr. ensuir from Lat. insequi, to follow upon.
Entail. A fee-simple is the entire estate in land, when a man holds the estate to him and his heirs without any contingent rights in any one else not claiming through him. An estate-tail is a partial interest, cut (Fr. taillé) out of the entire fee, when land is given to a man and the heirs male of his body, leaving a right of re-entry in the original owner on failure of male descendants of the tenant in tail, as he was called, or person to whom the estate-tail was given. The entail of an estate is dividing the fee into successive estates for life, or in tail, under such conditions as required by law.
Enter.—Entrance. Fr. entrer, Lat. intrare, to go in.
Enterprise. Fr. entreprise, from entreprendre, to undertake, an old form of which, emprendre, gave our poetical emprise.
To Entertain. Fr. entretenir (from Lat. tenere, to hold), mutually to hold, to hold in talk, to hold together.—Cot.
Enthusiasm. Gr. ενθεος, ενθους, full of the (θεος) god, inspired, possessed ; ενθουσιαζω, to be so inspired.
To Entice. OFr. entiser, enticher, atiser, Norman entincher (Decorde), Bret. atiza, to instigate, incite. Satanas entichad David qu'il feist anumbrer ces de Israel.—L. des Rois Mult l'entice, mult l'aguillone.
Benoit, Chron. Norm. 2. 194.
Ses gens r'amoneste e atise Li dux.—Ib. 2. 205.
Fr. attiser, to kindle, to stir the fire ; attise-querelle, a stirrer-up of quarrels. The origin is the hissing sound by which dogs are incited in setting them on to fight with each other or to attack another animal. These sounds are represented in E. by the letters ss! st! ts! being doubtless imitations of the angry sounds of a quarrelling dog. In other languages they are more distinctly articulated. Fin. has ! has ! cry used in setting on dogs ; hasittaa, Esthon. assa-tama, to set them on. Lap. has ! as !

Serv. osh! cry to drive out dogs; Lap. hasketet, hoskotet, hotsalet, to set dogs on to attack; hastet, hostet, to provoke, challenge, incite. Pl.D. hiss, cry used in setting on dogs; hissen, to set them on, to drive by the aid of dogs; de schaop hissen, to drive sheep.—Danneil.
Du. hissen, hisschen, hitsen, hussen, to hiss, to set on dogs, to instigate, kindle, inflame.—Kil.
G. hetzen, anhetzen, to set on dogs, to irritate, incite; hitze, rage, heat.
At other times a t is taken as the initial of the imitative syllable, giving G. zischen, Pl.D. tissen, E. dial. tiss, to hiss.
To tice is used in Pembrokeshire, as Pl.D. hissen, for the employment of a dog in driving another animal; to tice a dog at a pig; to tice the pig out of the garden, to set a dog at it to drive it out, as Pl.D. de swine uut dem have hissen.
Hence probably the simple form to tice, in the sense of inciting, alluring, was already current in the language before the importation of the Fr. entiser. Compare Sw. tiissa, to set on dogs, to set people by the ears.
The It. has forms corresponding both to hiss and tiss. The cry used in setting on dogs is izz! at Florence, and uzz! at Modena, whence izzare and uzzare il cane (corresponding to G. hetzen), to set on a dog (Muratori, Diss. 33); izza (corresponding to G. hitze), anger, contest; adizzare, aissare, to hiss, set on dogs, provoke to anger; tizzare, to egg on, provoke, to stir the fire; tizzo, tizzone, a fire-brand; stizzare, -ire, to provoke, enrage, stir the fire; stizza, anger; stizzo, a fire-brand. Walach. atzitzá, to set on, incite, fall into a passion, kindle fire.
In accordance with the foregoing analogies it is impossible either to separate It. izzare, uzzare, from tizzare, attizzare, or to doubt that the common origin of all is the hissing on of a dog against another animal. The idea of provoking to anger then must be taken as the original image, and that of stirring the fire as a figurative application, directly contrary to what we should have expected; and we find the explanation of Lat. titio, to which we have no clue in the ancient language, in the It. tizzare, Fr. attiser, commonly regarded as derivatives from the Latin noun.

Entire. It. intero, Fr. entier, from Lat. integer, whole, untouched.
Entity. Fr. entité, from Lat. ens, pr. pcpl. of esse, to be.
Entomology. Gr. ἔντομα, insects; from being divided into several sections; τέμνω, τετόμα, to cut.
Entrails. Fr. entrailles, Prov. intralias, OFr. entraipte, from Lat. interanea, the inwards or intestines, the inward parts of the body.
Entreat. From Lat. tractare, to handle, Fr. traicter, to meddle with, to discourse, debate, or make mention of.—Cot.
To Enure. From Fr. heur, hap, fortune, chance, was formed E. ure, fortune, destiny, the experience of good or evil.
Now late hire come, and liche as God your ure For you disposeth, taketh your aventure, Lidgate, corrected from Hal.
And nane suld duell with him bot thai That wald stand with him to the end, And take the ure that God wald send. Bruce, viii. 405.
Hence to have in ure, to put in ure, or to enure, is to experience, to practise, to take effect.
Salomon Tellith a tale—whether in dede done Or mekely feigned to our instruccion Let clerkes determine, but this I am sure Moche like what I myself have had in ure. Chaucer, Rem. Love, 158.
He gan that lady strongly to appeal Of many heinous crimes by her inured. F. Q. in R.
Inured to arms, practised in arms. To enure to the advantage of some one, in legal language, is to take effect to his advantage.
The Fr. heur is not to be confounded with heure, hour, moment, being derived (as conclusively established by Diez) from Lat. augurium, Ptg. agouro, Prov. augur, agur, Cat. ahuir, augury, omen; whence Prov. bonäur, maläur, good, evil fortune; It. sciagurato, sciaurato (exauguratus), ill-omened, unlucky; sciagura, sciaura, ill fortune, disaster; OFr. bienaureiz, fortunate.
To Envelop. It. inviluppare, Fr. envelopper, the equivalent of E. wrap, wlap, lap.
L'enfant envolupat en draps e pausat en la crupia.—Rayn.
And sche bare her firste borun sone and wlaf-pide him in clothes and leyde him in a cracche.—Wiclif See Lap.
Environ. Fr. environ, around, from virer, to veer, turn round, whirl about.
Envoy. Fr. envoyer, to send. See Convoy.
Envy. Lat. invidia. It. invidia, inveggia, Cat. enveja, Prov. enveia, Fr.

envie. Invidere, to envy, should signify to look askance at.
Ep-, Eph.-, Epi-. In compounds of Gr. extraction, the prep. ἐπί, upon.
Epaulet. Dim. from Fr. espaule, épaule, Prov. espatla, Sp. espalda, It. spalla, the shoulder, from Lat. spathula, dim. of Lat. spatha, Gr. σπάθη, a blade, broad flat instrument.
Ephemeral. Gr. ἡμέρα, a day, ἐφήμερος, daily, lasting only a day.
Epic. Gr. ἔπος, a word, saying, a verse or line of poetry; τὰ ἔπη, heroic poetry, as opposed to μέλη, lyric poetry.
Epicure. — Epicurean. From the name of the Greek philosopher Epicurus.
Epilepsy. Gr. ἐπιληψία, a seizure, from λαμβάνω, to seize, take.
Epiphany. Gr. ἐπιφάνεια, manifestation; φαίνω, to make to appear; τὰ ἐπιφάνια, the festival of the Epiphany or manifestation of Christ to the Gentiles.
Episcopacy. — Episcopal. See Bishop.
Episode. Gr. ἐπεισόδιον, something coming in upon; εἴσοδος, an incoming or arrival.
Epistle. See Apostle.
Epitaph. Gr. ἐπιτάφιον, something written on (τάφος) a tomb.
Epithet. Gr. ἐπίθετος, composed, added over and above, from τίθημι, to put.
Epitome. Gr. ἐπιτομή, a cutting short; τέμνω, to cut.
Epoch. Gr. ἐποχή, a cessation, pause, stop in the reckoning of time, point where one period ends and another begins; ἐπέχω, to hold back, stop, check.
Equal. — Equable. — Equator. — Equity. — Equi-. Lat. æquus, even, level, thence alike in every part, not raised one above another, just, right. Æquitas, equality, symmetry, equity, justice. Æquare, to make even, to make equal.
* Equerry. From Fr. écurie, stables. Escuyer d'écurie, a equerry in a prince's stables, the gentleman of a lord's horse. —Cot. From OHG. scur, scura, sciura, a pent-house, out-house, barn, hut, must be explained Mid. Lat. scura, scuria, Prov. escura, escuria, Fr. écurie, barn, stables; G. scheuer, scheure, pent-house, loft, barn; Walach. schură, a barn. The form equerry corresponds with Mid. Lat. scurarius, Walach. schurariu, the officer in charge of the barn or stables.
Equestrian. Lat. equester, equestris, pertaining to a horseman.
Equilibrium. Lat. æquilibrium, from libra, a balance.
To Equip. Fr. équiper, to attire, provide with necessary furniture, set in array by full provision for a service.—Cot. From ON. skipa, to arrange, AS. sceapan, scyppan, to form, G. schaffen, to create, provide, furnish.
Era. Lat. æra, pl. of æs, brass, was used in the sense of money, and thence applied to the separate headings or items of an account. Quid tu, inquam, soles, cum rationem e dispensatore accipis, si Æra singula probasti, summam, quæ ex his confecta sit, non probare ?—Cic. in Facc. In later Lat. the casting of accounts seems to have been taken as the type of computation or numbering in general, and æra (converted into a fem. singular) was transferred from the items of an account to the separate headings of any enumeration or the numerical reference by which they were marked, and was elliptically used in the sense of numbering or computation. The Visigothic laws are cited by liber, titulus, and æra. Faustus Reiensis (ob. A.D. 480) says, Sacer numerus dicitur quia trecenti in æra sive supputatione signum crucis, &c. And again. Per crucis enim signum et per sacrum Jesu nomen apud Græcos æra utriusque supputationis imprimitur.—Duc. Per singulos Evangelistas numerus quidem capitulis affixus adjacet, quibus numeris subdita est æra quadam minio notata (a numerical reference in red ink) quæ indicat in quoto canone positus sit numerus cui subjecta est æra : V. g. si est æra prima, in primo canone.—Isidor. in Duc. Hilderic has Æra dierum for numeri dierum, where it is to be regretted that Duc. has not cited the passage at large. The word is now understood in the sense of a numbering or reckoning of years from a date to be gathered from the context. Thus the Christian era is the reckoning of years from the birth of Christ; the era of Augustus (according to Isidore) from his first laying of the tribute. Æra singulorum annorum constituta est a Cæsare Augusto quando primum censum exegit.—Orig. V. 36.
Ere.—Erst. Goth. air, early; AS. ær, ærost, early, before, first, heretofore; Du. eer, before, sooner; G. ehe, eher, eheste, before, soonest; erste, first.
To Err.—Error. Lat. errare, G. irren, to wander, go astray; irre, astray. Fin. eri, separate, apart; eri-lainen, of a different nature; ero, departure, separation; ero-kirja, a writing of divorce; erhetys, error, sin; erhettya, erheilla, to err, to wander; erheys, wrong way, wandering; erá-maa (maa, land), a remote or desert place, wilderness, Gr. ἔρημος. Esthon. ärrä, separate, away. Lap. eny, away, to another place. Lith. Irti, to separate, go asunder.
Erysipelas. Gr. ἐρυσίπελας, St Anthony's fire, commonly derived from ἐρυθρός, red, and πέλλα, skin.—Lidd.
Escape. Immediately from Fr. eschapper (Picard. escaper), to shift away, scape, to slip out of.—Cot. Diez resolves the It. scappare into excappare, to slip out of one's cloke (cappa) in the hurry of flight; and the synonymous scampare into excampare, to quit the field (campus). The separation of the two forms is wholly unnecessary. The radical idea is simply that of slipping away.
Myght he haf slypped to be unslayn. Sir Gawaine, 1858. might he have escaped being slain. The two senses are united in Walach. scapare, to let slip, to slip, to fall, fall into error, also to slip away, escape; and in Du. schampen, identical with It. scampare, to glance aside, slip, graze, escape, fall; schampig, slippery, schampelen, to slip, to stumble.—Kil. The train of thought seems to be a quick unimpeded movement, a glance along the surface, avoidance of resistance or restraint. W.ysgip, Gael. sgiab, snatch, start; E. skip, light, rapid movement, to pass over, avoid; Sc. skiff, skift, to move lightly and smoothly along, to skim; to scheyff, to escape.—Jam. It. schippire, to escape.—Altieri. Du. schuyffen, schuyffelen, schuyven, to slip, to shove, to fly; schuifknoop, a slip-knot; he ging schuiven, he escaped.
Escheat. From Lat. cadere, to fall, arose Prov. caer, OFr. chaeir, cheoir, cheir, escheir, to fall, to happen; chaeit, chaet, fallen (Chron. Norm.); cheite, fall; escheete, escheoite, escheate, succession, heritage, the falling in of a property, especially that to the lord of the fee, for want of heirs or for misfeasance of the tenant.
Eschew. Fr. eschever, to avoid, bend from; esquiver, to shun, avoid, shift away, slip aside.—Cot. It. schifare, schivare, to avoid, to parry a blow. Sw. skef, Dan. skieve, oblique; skieve, to slant, slope, swerve. The primitive image, as in escape, is slipping aside, sliding over a surface instead of striking it direct. G. schieben, to shove or push along a surface, sich schieben, to slip sideways, to become awry; Du. schuyffen, schuyven, to slip, push forwards, to escape; schuif, a sliding shutter, drawer, &c. See Escape.

Escort. Fr. escorte, from It. scorta, a guide, convoy, direction; scorgere, scorto or scorgiuto, to discern, perceive, also to lead or direct unto.—Fl. Explained by Diez from Lat. ex-corrigere, as accorgere, to perceive, from ad-corrigere, but until it is shown how the meaning of scorgere is evolved out of that of corrigere there is little gained by such a derivation.
Escroll.—Escrow.—Scroll. Fr. escroue, a scroll, register-roll of expenses, written warrant, &c.—Cot. ON. skrá, Sw. skrá, a short writing; gildeskrå, the rules of a corporation. PLD. schrae, schraa, by-laws; schrage, a written ordinance, formula of an oath, placard.—Brem. Wtb. The original meaning is doubtless a slip or shred of parchment. Pl.D. schraden, schraen, to shred; Du. schroode, schroye, segmen, pars abscissa, pagella, segmen chartaceum, sceda; Ang. schrowe.—Kil.
Esculent. Lat. esculentus; esca, what is to be eaten, food, from edo, I eat.
Escutcheon. OFr. escusson, a small shield, a coat of arms; escu. It. scudo, Lat. scutum, a shield.
Esophagus. Gr. οἰσοφάγος, from an obsolete οἴσω, preserved in οἴσω, future of φέρω, to bear, and φαγεῖν, to eat. But this is the only instance in which οἰσο-appears in comp.
Esoteric. Lat. esotericus, from Gr. ἔσω, within, the comparative of which would be ἐσώτερον.
Espalier. Originally applied to trees or plants trained with their backs to a wall or trellis, from It. spalla, Sp. espalda, shoulder. In English gardening confined to trees trained against stakes or paling, perhaps from the influence of an accidental resemblance in the name to E. paling. Sp. espaldar, place where one puts his back to rest against, piece of tapestry against which the back of the chair rests, espalier in gardens; espaldera, wall-trees. It. spalliera, any place or thing to lean against with one's shoulders, any hedgerow of trees, privet, ivy, vines, or any verdure growing up against any wall.—Fl. Fr. espalier, fruit-trees trained against a wall, either by nailing, or by a framework of laths or stakes.—Trevoux.
Esplanade. Fr. esplanade, a planing of ways, by grubbing up trees and removing all other encumbrances. Esplaner, to level or lay even with the ground.—Cot.
Esquire. It. scudiero, Fr. escuyer (properly a shield-bearer, Lat. scutum, a shield), an esquire or squire, who attended on a knight and bore his lance and shield.
Essart. See Assart
Essay. See Assay.
Essence. Lat. essentia, the being of a thing, from esse, to be.
* Essoin. Fr. ensoigne, essoin, a law-ful excuse for an absent, or good cause of discharge for an impotent, person.—Cot.
The original meaning of Fr. ensoign, essoign, Mid.Lat. exonium, is occupation, business, need, then such need as excuses a man from other avocations, analogous to G. nothsache, a necessary thing, also a good and lawful excuse before a tribunal.
—Küttn. OSax. sunnea, need, business; Prov. sonh, Fr. soin, care, industry, labour, pains.—Cot. Wall. sogn, occupation, business; Fr. besogne, business; besoin, need, want.
Esteem.—Estimate. Lat. æstimare, to value, assess.
Estoppel. A legal impediment. Identical with stopple, stopper; OFr. estouper, to stop.
Estovers. Supply of needful wood for repairs, fuel, &c. OFr. estoveir, estovoir, to be needful. Grisons stuver, stovair (=G. müssen), to have need. Diez suggests an origin from Lat. studere, which is not satisfactory.
Estre. Estre, state, condition, place. Fr. estre, s. s. from estre, to be.
What shall I tell unto Silvestre, Or of your name or of your estre. Gower in Hal.
Seid the tothir to Jak, for thou knowist better than I All the estris of this house, go up thyself and spy. Chaucer, Pardoner and Tapster, 555.
Li vilains cui li estres fu, to whom the place belonged.—Fab. et Contes, 3, 118.
Estreat. Lat. extractum, the copy of any original writing, but especially of fines set down in the rolls of a court, to be levied of any man for his offence.—B. The recognisances are said to be estreated when the officer is directed to take out such a copy for the purpose of levying the amount.
To Etch. To engrave by corrosion; G. ätzen, to cause to eat, to feed, corrode, etch.
Eternal. Lat. æternus, from ævum, lifetime, life, age, indefinite duration. See Ever.
Ether.—Ethereal. Gr. αἰθήρ, the air, the sky or heavens; αἴθειν, to light up, burn, blaze.
Ethic. Gr. ἠθικός, having to do with morals ; ἦθος, an accustomed seat, the haunts of animals, abodes of men, custom, usage, habits and manners of men. Considered by Liddell as a modification of ἔθος, custom, usage, manners, from ἔθω, to be wont.
Etiquette. Fr. étiquette, originally a ticket indicating a certain reference to the object to which it is affixed, then applied to certain regulations as to behaviour, dress, &c., to be observed by particular persons on particular occasions. See Ticket.
Etymology.—Etymon. Gr. ἔτυμος, true; τὸ ἔτυμον, the true origin of a word.
Eu-. In words derived from Gr. is the adv. εὖ, well, much used in comp., when it implies goodness, abundance, easiness.
Eucharist. Gr. εὐχαριστία, thankfulness, giving of thanks ; χάρις, good-will, thanks.
Eunuch. Gr. εὐνοῦχος, a castrated man, on account of their employment as guardians of the women in an Eastern household, from εὐνή, the bed, and ἔχω, to keep, have the care of.
Euphemism. Gr. εὐφημισμός, from εὖ and φημί, to speak.
Evangelist.—Evangelic. Lat. evangelium, Gr. εὐαγγέλιον, happy tidings, from εὖ and ἄγγελος, a messenger, message.
Even. G. eben, Du. even, effen, ON. jafn, equal, plain, level; jafnan, jamnan, continually; always. Lat. æquus, even ; æquor, the level surface of the sea.
Evening. Du. avend, G. abend, the sinking of the day. Swiss aben, to fall off, decrease, fail; from G. ab, off, away. Derwein im fässchen abet, the wine sinks in the cask; er abet, he declines, falls away; es abet, it draws towards evening; the day falls.
Ever. Goth. aivs, time, long time; niaiv, never; aiveins, everlasting; usaiv-jan, to endure. OHG. ewa, ewe, e, Du. eeuw, ON. æfi, Lat. ævum, Gr. αἰών, an age, life; Sw. ä (in composition), all, ever; Lat. ætas, æternus, &c. Gr. αἰεί, αἰέν, αἶες, ever. AS. æva, ā, æfre, æfer, æg (in composition), E. aye, ever. Fin. ikä, Esthon. igga, age, life-time, time. Fin. ikäinen, perpetual; ijāti, ikä (in composition), for ever; iki, altogether.

Esthon. igga (in composition), each, every; iggawenne, perpetual.
Every. AS. æfre, ever ; ælc, each, all of a series one by one. Hence OE. ever-ælc, everilk, evereche, every.
Evil. G. übel, Goth. ubils, Du. ovel, evel.
Ewe. Gr. oïs, Lat. ovis, a sheep. AS. eowu, Du. ouwe, oye, a female sheep.
Ewer. Fr. aiguière, a water vessel, from Lat. aqua, OFr. aigue, aive, eve, aive, eau, water. Ewer, aiguier.—Palsgr. Fr. eauier, corresponding exactly in form, has a somewhat different application from the E. word, signifying a gutter, sewer.—Cot.
Ex-.—Ef-.—E-. Lat. e, ex, Gr. ἐκ, ἐξ, out of, from. The radical form of the prep. is Gr. ἐκ, the κ of which in com-position is in Lat. assimilated to a fol-lowing f. Thus Gr. ἐκφεύγω becomes Lat. effugio.
Exact. Lat. exactus, perfectly done, carried out, complete, accurate ; from exigere (ex and ago), to perfect, accom-plish, to bring up to the standard of com-parison.
Exaggerate. Lat. exaggerare, to heap up, augment greatly, from ex and agger, a heap.
Exalt. Lat. exaltare ; altus, high.
Examine. Lat. examen, for exagmen (from exigere, exactum, to bring a thing to a certain standard of comparison, to compare, weigh, examine), the tongue of a balance, examination, weighing. See Exact.
Example.—Exemplify. Lat. exem-plum, a copy, a specimen, an individual or portion taken from a number or quan-tity to show the nature of the mass. Ex-plained from eximere, exemptum, to take away.
Exasperate. Lat. asper, rough.
Excel.—Excellent. Lat. excello, pro-perly to be lifted up, to stand out above others, from the obs. cello, Gr. κέλλω, to drive, to urge onwards.
Excise. Fr. accise, excise, from Lat. excidere, excisum, to cut off. Sp. sisa, clippings, pilferings, cabbage, also (per-haps from being considered as a clipping taken by the Lord on the article going into consumption) a tax on eatables.
Excoriate. Lat. corium, skin, hide.
Excrescence.—Excretion. Lat. ex-cresco, excretum, to grow out, or up.
Execrate. Lat. execrari, exsecrari (from sacer, sacri, devoted or set apart for the purposes of the deities whether good or evil, sacred, accursed), to devote to the malign deities, to wish evil to, to curse.
Execute. Lat. exsequor, exequor, ex-ecutus, to follow out, or to the end. See -secute.
Exempt. Lat. eximere, exemptus, to take away, to free from ; emere, to take, to buy.
Exequies. Lat. exequiæ, the funeral train or pomp, from ex and sequor, to follow.
Exercise. Lat. exercere, to keep in work ; exercitium, a keeping in work, exercise. Gr. ἔργον, work, deed ; ἔργω (the radical meaning of which seems to be to exert force, to use strength), to drive by force ; also, as the obs. root of ἔρδω, ἔοργα, to do work.
Exert. Lat. exsero, exsertum, to stretch out, put forth. See -sert.
Exhaust. Lat. haurio, haustum, to draw.
Exhort. Lat. hortor, -ari, to urge on, encourage, instigate.
Exile. Lat. exul, exsil, one driven from his native soil (solum), as the word is explained by Festus. Exsilium, exili-um, banishment, exile.
Exist. Lat. existo (ex and sisto, to stand), to be, have a being.
Exodus. Gr. ἔξοδος, a going forth, from ἐξ and ὁδός, a route, going.
Exonerate. Lat. onus, -eris, a burthen.
Exorbitant. From Lat. orbita, the track of a wheel, exorbito, to go out of the track, to deviate, whence exorbitans, out of the usual course, excessive.
To Exorcise. Gr. ὅρκος, an oath ; ὁρκίζω, ἐξορκίζω, to bind by an oath, to adjure, to drive away an evil spirit by the power of adjuration.
Exordium. Lat. ordior, orsus sum, exordior, properly to fix the weft or woof, to make a beginning in weaving, then to begin in general, to begin to speak ; ex-ordium, the warp of a web, a beginning.
Exotic. Gr. ἐξωτικός, belonging to fo-reign parts, from ἔξω, without, abroad.
Expand.—Expansion. Lat. pando, pansum or passum, to spread out, lay open.
Expatiate. Lat. spatiari, to walk abroad.
Expect. See -spect.
Expedite.— Expedient.— Expedi-tion. Lat. expedio, to despatch. From the figure of catching by the (Lat. pes, pedis) foot, are developed the opposite sig-nifications of impedio, to catch or entangle by the foot, to embarrass, impede, hinder, and expedio, to set free one caught by the foot, to extricate, disengage, despatch, prepare, make ready, provide ; to do the opposite of hindering, to be serviceable, to help on.
Expend.—Expense. Lat. pendo, pen-sum, to weigh, thence to pay money.
Experience.—Expert.—Experiment. Lat. experior, expertus sum, to undergo, know by actual apprehension or actual suffering, prove, try. Comperio, to have certain intelligence, to ascertain. Reperio, to find. Pario, to get, to acquire.
Expiate. Lat. pio, -atum, to make the deity favourable. See Pious.
Expire. Lat. expiro, exspiro. See -spire.
Explode.—Explosion. Lat. explodo, explosum (ex and plaudo, to clap hands), to drive off the stage with clapping of hands.
Exploit.—Esplees. OFr. exploit, ex-pleit, deed, execution, despatch, matter performed ; (hence) an execution of a judgment and a seisin by virtue thereof, also the possession or holding of a thing. —Cot. Lat. explicitum, in the sense of accomplished. His explicitis rebus.—Caesar. Versibus explicitum est omne duobus opus.—Martial.
Explore. Lat. exploro, to search out, a sense which it seems impossible to connect with that of the simple ploro, to bewail.
Expostulate. Lat. postulo, to ask after, also to complain.
Expunge. Lat. expungo, to prick out, erase, as a word written on a waxen tablet.
Extant. Lat. extans, standing out so as to appear above others ; ex and sto, to stand.
Extenuate. Lat. extenuare; ex and tenuo, to make small or thin ; tenuis, thin, fine.
Exterior.—External. Lat. exterior, externus, from ex, out of.
Exterminate. Lat. exterminare, to drive or cast out, from ex and terminus, a boundary, limit.
Extinguish.—Extinct. Lat. stinguo, stinctum, to put out. From the root stig, sting, signifying prick, the passage from which to the idea of putting out is not clear.

Extirpate. To root out. Lat. stirps, stock, trunk, root.
Extol. Lat. tollo, to raise or lift up.
Extra.—Extraneous. Lat. extra, without, beyond.
Exuberant. Lat. ubero, to be fruitful, fertile, abundant ; from uber, udder, breast, and as an adj. fertile, abounding.
Exude. Lat. exsudo; sudo, to sweat.
Exult. Lat. exsulto, exulto; salto, to leap, jump for joy.
Eye. Goth. augo, G. auge, AS. eage, Lat. oc-ulus.
Eylet-hole.—Oilet-hole. A hole in a garment wherein a point is put.—B. Fr. oeillet, a little eye, an oylet or eyelet-hole.—Cot.
Eyre. From Lat. iter, itineris, OFr. eirre, a journey, the Justices in Eyre (in itinere) were a court deputed every few years to make a tour of the royal forests and hear complaints. Champ. oirre, way, road ; oirrer, to journey.
Eyry. An eagle's nest, erroneously explained in the first edition as if from eggery, a collection of eggs. Really from Fr. aire, an airie or nest of hauks—Cot., which, it must be observed, is masculine, and so distinguished from aire, Lat. area, a flat place, floor, plot of ground, &c., which is feminine. The two were confounded when aire was latinized in the form of area. 'Aves rapaces—exspectant se invicem aliquando prope nidum suum consuetum, qui a quibusdam area dicitur.'—Fredericus II., de Venatu in Duc.
It is probable that aire in the foregoing sense is a special application of Prov. aire (a masc. noun), signifying first air, then probably climate, and thence coun-try, residence, family.
L'amors, don ieu sui mostraire, Nasquet en un gentil aire.
Love, of whom I am the expositor, was born in a gentle birthplace.—Rayn.
Quel mon non es crestian de nul aire Que siens liges, o dels parens non fos : That in the world there is not a Christian of any family that was not the liegeman of him or his parents.—Ib.
See Debonnair.

**Fable.** Lat. *fabula*, a tale, from *for*, *fatus sum*, *fari*, Gr. φημί, to say.
**Fabric.** Lat. *faber*, a wright or worker in wood, metal, &c. ; *fabrica*, a working, the work of an artificer, a building.
**Face.** Lat. *facies*, the make or visible form of a thing, from *facio*, to make, as Du. *gedaente*, external appearance, form, shape, from *doen*, to make, do.
**Facetious.** Lat. *facetus*, clever, humorous.
**Facility.—Faculty.** From Lat. *facio*, to do, are *facilis* (do-like), to be readily done, easy, and the contrary of this, *difficilis* (dis-facilis), difficult. *Facilitas* and *facultas* are parallel forms of the abstract noun with slightly differing applications fundamentally signifying readiness or ability to do.
**Fact.—Factor.—Factitious.** Lat. *facio*, *factum*, to make, do.
**Fad.** A temporary fancy. To fad, to be busy about trifles ; faddy, frivolous.—Hal. Formed from the term *fiddle-faddle*, representing rapid movements to and fro, idle, purposeless action or talk. See Fangle, Figary, Fidget.
**To Fade.** Du. *vadden*, to wither, or fade ; *vaddigh*, flaccid, faded, flagging, lazy.—Kil. As the G. has *fittich*, as well as *flittich*, a wing, and as we have *fugle-man* from G. *flügelmann* ; *ferret* from Fr. *fleuret*, to fag, and *faggy*, *foggy*, from *flag* and *flaggy* ; so I believe Du. *vad-den* and E. *fade* are from forms like Du. *fladderen*, Sw. *fladra*, to flap, flutter. A pancake, or flap-jack, G. *flade*, is in Du. *vadde*, *libi admodum tenuis et flaccidi genus*.—Kil. Comp. OFr. *flappi*, faded, withered.—C. *nouv. nouv.* ii. ?
**To Fadge.** To agree, be adapted to, be made fit.—B. AS. *fegan*, *gefegan*, to join ; G. *fügen*, Du. *voegen*, Sw. *foga*, to join, to become, suit with, be proper, to accommodate.
And al yet thaet the *feageth* hire ; and all besides that belongs to her.—Ancren Riwle, 58.
*Ifeiget*, *ifeied*, compared, likened.—Ib. 90, 128.
**To Fag.** Probably from *flag* by the loss of the *l*, signifying in the first place to flap or fall back upon itself, to be flaccid, then to be faint or exhausted, and actively, to cause to faint, to tire out. It is used in the Devon. dial. in the sense of flapping or fluttering. ' With their skittering flimsy gowns *vagging* in the wind or *reeping* in the mud.' A slight change of vowel gives *foggy*, having hanging flesh.—Hal. ' *Flosche*, *foggy*, weak, soft.'—Cot. With these may be compared It. *fiacco*, tired, drooping, withered ; *fiaccare*, to weary, droop in body or mind, fade or wither.—Fl. S' *avachir*, to slacken, grow flaggy, quail, fade, wax feeble.—Cot. I was much flagged and exhausted by the heat of the weather.—Rich, Babylon.
**Fag-end.** The latter end of cloth—B. ; the *lag-end*, the end which *flags*, or hangs loose ; the original *flag* passing into *fag* on the one hand, and *lag* on the other, in the same way that we formerly saw *clatch* passing into *catch* and *latch*, *asklent* into *ascant* and *aslant*, by the loss of the liquid or mute respectively.
I could be well content To entertain the *lag-end* of my life With quiet hours.—H. IV. in Nares.
The senators of Athens together with the common *lag* of people.—Timon of Athens.
**Fagot.** Fr. *fagot*, It. *fagotto*, W. *ffagod*. Perhaps connected with *ffasgu*, to bind, tie ; *ffasgell*, a wisp, bundle.
**To Fail.** Fr. *faillir*, to fail, slip, err, omit, want, miss, fade, cease. W. *ffaelu*, Bret. *fallout*, to fail, to be wanting ; G. *fehlen*, to miss, go wrong, fail, be wanting ; Du. *faelen*, to slip, want, be wanting ; *faelie-kant*, an oblique angle. Probably the fundamental idea is that of slipping. Gr. σφάλλω, to cause to slip or fall, to lead into fault or error, deceive, mislead ; σφάλλομαι (as Lat. *fallor*), to be mistaken, to fail ; ἰσφάλη της ἐλπίδος, he was deceived, or failed in his hopes ; σφαλερός, slippery, dangerous ; σφάλμα, a slip, error, failure, fault. The notion of slipping away, slipping from under, will commonly explain the senses of Lat. *fal-lere*. *Fallere datam fidem*, to break his word ;—*mandata*, to fail to perform them ;—*visum*, to escape notice. Gael. *feall*, deceive, betray, fail.
**Fain.—To Fawn.** Fain, glad. ' Fair words make fools *fain*.'—Ray. AS. *fagen*, joyful, glad ; *fægnian*, *fahnian*, Goth. *faginon*, OHG. *gefean*, ON. *fagna*, to rejoice ; *fagnadr*, joy, civility ; *fagna einum wel*, to give one a courteous reception.

Hence to fawn on one, to affect pleasure in his company. Faynare, or flaterere, adulator.—Pr. Pm. To be fain to do a thing is to be glad to do it. But there is a curious resemblance in the expression to the OFr. avoir fain (for faim, hunger), to be desirous of something. ' I lyste, I have a great wyll or desyre to do a thynge, J'ai fain.' ' I lysted nat so well to slepe this twelve monethes : je n'avoye pas si grand fayn de dormir de cest an.'—Palsgr. Swiss Rom. fan, hunger; e fan, j'ai envie, j'ai dessein.

Faint. One of the numerous cases in which words from different origins have coalesced in a common form. To faint, in the sense of losing the powers of life, can hardly be separated from Lat. vanus, empty; Fr. vain, empty, faint, feeble (whence s'evanouir, to faint); W. and Bret. gwan, Gael. fann, weak, faint, vain; fannaich, to become weak, to faint; Fr. se faner, to fade, wither, wax dead. But in other applications the word seems certainly to be taken from Fr. se feindre, to make show of one thing and do another, to disable himself more than he needs, to do less than he can do. Sans se feindre, diligently, in good earn-est; feintement, faintement, falsely, feign-edly, faintly—Cot. ; faintise, idleness; foindre, to grow weak, to play ill.—Pat. de Champ. Synge out man, why fayne yow? Pourquoy chantez vous a basse voix ?—Palsgr.

Fair. 1. Beautiful. ON. fagr, bright; fagr-blar, light blue; fagr-mæli, fair speech, flattery. 2. Lat. feria, holidays; then, like It. feria, Fr. foire, applied to the market held on certain holidays. 'Feriam quoque quam nomine alio mercatorum nundinas appellant.'—Duc.

Fairy. A supernatural being sup-posed to influence the fate of men. It. fatare, to charm as witches do, to be-witch; fata, a fairy, witch.—Fl. Sp. hado, fate, destiny; hada, one of the fates, witch, fortune-teller; hadar, to divine. Fr. fée, fatal, appointed, destined, enchanted; fée, a fairy (féerie, witchery); par féerie, fatally, by destiny.—Cot. Hence E. fairy. Probably also there may be some con-fusion with another designation, Sc. fare-folks, fairies. Thir woddis and thir schawis all, quod he, Sum tyme inhabit war and occupyit With Nymphis and Faunis apoun every syde, Quhilk farefolkis or than ellis clepin we.—D.V. Du. vaerende wiif, hamadryas, sylvarum dea; also, a witch, a whirlwind. Probably from going away, vanishing. See Fern.

Faith. Lat. fides. It. fede, Fr. foi.

Faitour. The OFr. faiteor, faiteur (from faire, to make), OE. faitour, pro-perly only a maker or constructor (like Lat. fingere, and E. forge, which origin-ally signified simply to make or form), acquired a bad sense, and was applied to one who makes for an ill purpose, who makes his appearance or conduct other than it naturally would be. See To Feign. Faytowre, fictor, simulator; faytowre that feynyth sekenesse for trowandise, vagius.—Pr. Pm.

Falchion. Written as if from Lat. falx. It. falce, a scythe, sickle, weeding-hook; falcione, any kind of great Welsh-hook, brown bill, or chopping knife.—Fl. But it is very doubtful whether Fr. fau-chon, the immediate origin of our word, is to be explained on this principle, as swords of scimitar-shape were not used at an early period in Western Europe. It seems to be only another way of spell-ing fausson. Mid. Lat. falson, apparently a short heavy sword used like the miseri-cordia, for piercing the joints of the ar-mour of a fallen enemy, from fausser, to pierce. See Faucet. ' Matthieu de Montmorenci tenoit un faussart en sa main et en derompoit les presses.' ' Enses non deferant nec cultellos acutos nec lan-ceas seu falsones!' ' Arma offensibilia, spata, falcia, misericordia, ranchonum et his similia.'—Carp. 'Aux fauchons, aux coutiaus a pointe.'—Duc.

Falcon. Lat. falco, from the hooked beak; falx, a curved knife, a hook.

To Fall.—Fell. ON. falla, Du. vallen, to fall; ON. fella, Du. vellen, velden, to fell, or cause to fall, to throw down, lay prostrate. The Gr. σφάλλω and its derivatives (see Fail) look as if the radical meaning of the word were, to slip.

Fallacy. Lat. fallacia; fallo to de-ceive.

Fallow. 1. The original meaning of the word is simply pale, in which sense it is used by Chaucer of the pale horse in the Revelations. His eyen holwe and grisly to behold. His hewe falwe and pale as ashen cold. G. falb, pale, faded (falbes roth, —grün; pale red, —green); then appropriated by custom to a pale reddish colour, like that of deer; der falbe, the chestnut or dun horse. AS. fealo, fealwe, pale reddish or yellowish. Fr. fauve, deep yellow, lion-tawny, light dun.—Cot. W. gwelw, a pale hue, gwelwi, to make pale. Du. vael kleed, a faded garment. AS. wealowian, to wither, fade. The apparent equivalent in the Finnish languages has the sense of white, shining; Fin. walkia, Lap. welkes, white; welkotet, to grow white or pale; Esthon. walge, white, clear, light; walge werrew, pale red; walkjas, whitish.
2. To fallow is to plough land for the purpose of leaving it open to the air before it is cultivated for sowing, and we should not be without analogy in explaining the expression from the red colour of ploughed land. So Gael. dearg, red, and also land recently ploughed; as a verb, to redden, to plough; Sc. faugh, fallow in colour and fallow land. On the other hand it seems doubtful whether fallow in the sense of breaking up the sod or surface of the land may not be from Sc. fail, a sod or turf; Sw. vall, sward; valla sig, to gather a sward. In the W. of England velling signifies ploughing up the turf or upper surface of the ground to lay in heaps for burning.—Ray. in Jam. Da. dial. falde, fælle, fælge, to break up the sward, give a first shallow ploughing; fald, falle (Pl.D. fallig-land—Schütze), stubble or grass land once ploughed; at saae i fallen, to sow on land so treated.—Molbech.
False. Lat. falsus, from fallo, falsum, to deceive.
To Falter. To speak in broken tones, to vacillate, totter. The formation of this word may be illustrated by the analogy of one or two others closely resembling it in construction and signification. To patter is to make a light rattling sound, or, as the equivalent Pl.D. paotern (pronounced pawtem), to repeat in a monotonous, unintelligible manner.—Danneil. The sound of the broad vowel introduces an l (similar to that in Sc. nolt, from nowt, cattle) in E. palter, to stammer, shuffle, trifle. Again, Sc. hatter is to speak thick and confusedly; to hotter, to simmer, rattle, to shake, jolt, walk unsteadily. The insertion of an l, as in patter, palter, brings us to N. haltra, to limp, to walk by uneven jerks. Now a form with an initial l, analogous to patter, hatter, is seen in N. fatra, Fr. fatrer, to bungle up a piece of work (a sense constantly expressed by the figure of stammering); fatras, a confused heap of trash, trifles (to be compared with Sc. hatter, a confused heap), fatraille, trash, trumpery; fatrouiller, to botch, to trifle.—Cot. I botche or bungyll a garment, je fatre, or fatrouille.—Palsgr. The insertion of the l, as in previous cases, gives E. falter, to speak or move unsteadily. In the case of hatter, haltra, as well as falter, the frequentative is accompanied by simple though probably less ancient forms, Sc. hat, haut, to hop, limp, N. halta, to halt, and Dan. dial. faute, to fail, to falter. At faute i sin tale, to falter in speech, to stammer. It. Sp. falta, Fr. faute, fault, defect; Sp. faltar, to fail, falter, be deficient. For the derivation of a fault from the notion of stumbling, compare G. stolpern, to stagger, blunder. Das war gewaltig gestolpert, he has committed a great fault.—Küttner.
To Famble.—Fumble. Synonymous in the first instance with faffle, maffle, to speak imperfectly like an infant. Stameren other famelen.—MS. in Hal. To fumble, balbutire.—Levins, Manipulus. The signification is then transferred to other kinds of bungling, imperfect action. Dan. famle, to stammer, stutter, and also to fumble, to handle in an inefficient manner, to handle repeatedly, feel for. Sw. famla, to grope, to feel for, to fumble; Pl.D. in der tasken fummeln, to fumble in one's pocket; Sw. dial. fabbla, febbla, to stammer, to stumble, to be clumsy in handling; feppelhändt, clumsy; fubblapå målet, to stutter like a drunken man; fubbla, to be awkward, handle awkwardly; fummla, to totter, stumble, to handle awkwardly, be slippery fingered. The same train of thought is seen in Sp. farfullar, Rouchi farfoulier, to stammer; Fr. farfouiller, to famble in the dirt, to search disorderly—Cot.; and in Manx moandagh, stammering, faltering; fer moandagh, a fumbler.—Cregeen.
Fame. Lat. fama, Gr. φήμη, from φημί, I say, speak.
Family. Lat. familia; famulus, a servant.
Famine. Fr. famine, from Lat. fames, hunger, starvation.
Fan. Lat. vannus, G. wanne, a winnowing fan, wannen, to winnow, from the same root with ventus, wind. Bret. gwent, wind; gwenta, venter ou vanner le bled, to winnow corn.—Legonidec. Gael. fannan, a gentle breeze.
Fanatic. Lat. fanaticus, inspired, beside oneself; a word applied to the priest or other official, whose business it was to give responses from the sanctuary (fanum) to such as consulted the deity or oracle.

Fancy.—Fantastic.—Fantom. Gr. φαινω, to appear, φανός, apparent, φαντάζω, to make appear; whence φαντασία, Fr. fantasie, imagination, fancy. Another formation from the same root is φάντασμα, It. fantasma, Fr. fantosme, fantome, an appearance, apparition, spectre, fantom.
Fang. Whatever seizes or clutches, especially the tooth of a ravenous beast; also the roots or projections by which the teeth themselves are fastened in the jaw. G. fangen, to catch, seize, take; Goth. fahan, AS. foan, fon, pret. feng, OHG. fâd, pret. feck, pl. fengum, whence the derivative fanga, to get. Similar relations are seen in Dan. gaa, G. gehen, to go; NE. gang, ON. ganga, pret. geck, pl. gengum; Goth. fahan, AS. hon, and E. hang.
Fangle.—New-fangled. Fangles, whimsies.—B. A hatred to fangles, and the French fooleries of his time.—Wood in Nares. Fingle-fangle, a trifle.—Hal. A nasalised form of G. fick-facken, to fidget, move to and fro without apparent purpose; fick-facker, a trifler, inconstant person; Sw. fick-fack, juggling tricks. The radical image is light, rapid movement to and fro, as with a switch. G. ficken, fickelen, to switch, move lightly to and fro; E. fickle, inconstant. Another form of the verb is Swiss fieggen, in some cantons fienggen, to fig, fidge, or fidget.—Stalder. Hessian neufängsch, desirous of novelty. Hence new-fangle or new-fangled, inconstant, changeable, given to novelty. New-fangled, not constant and stedy of purpose, muable.—Palsgr. The flesh is so new-fangell with mischaunce, That we ne con in nothing have pleasaunce, That souneth unto vertue any while. Manciples Tale.
Far. Goth. fairra, AS. feor, feorran, OHG. fer, G. fern, ON. fiarri, Dan. fiern.
Farce. A comedy stuffed with extravagant passages of wit.—B. Fr. farce, a pudding-haggis, the stuffing in meat; also a fond and dissolute play, interlude. Il fait ses farces, he plays his pranks.—Cot. Lat. farcire, farsum, to stuff.
Fardel. Sp. fardo, fardillo, a bale, bundle; fardage, baggage; Fr. hardes, baggage, furniture; hardée, a bundle, burden.—Roquef. Fardo, clothes, furniture.—Dict. Corrèze. Fr. fardel, fardeau, a bundle.
To Fare.—Ferry. Goth. faran, ON. fara, G. fahren, E. to fare, fundamentally to go, then to get on, to do, with reference to the luck which we meet with in our progress through life; to fare well or ill, to be prosperous, or the contrary, to meet with good or bad entertainment, and hence fare, entertainment, food. From ON. fara is formed fær, pervious, passable; din er fær, the river is passable; feria, to transport, set over; feria, a passage-boat. The G. fahren, is not only to go, but to carry, convey in a cart; fähr, a ferry, or place where people are carried over a stream. Du. vaerschip, a ship of burden; vaerwater, a navigable water; vaer, veer, vaerd, a ferry, a port, or landing-place of vessels.—Kil.
Farinaceous. Lat. farina, meal, from far, a general name for grain.
Farm. AS. feorm, what goes to the support of life, food, board, entertainment (explained from feorh, ON. fjör, life, as Lat. victus, food, from vivo, victum, to live); feormian, to supply with food, to support, entertain. Gewiton him tha eastan æhta lædan feoh and feorme: these then departed from the east, leading their possessions, cattle and stores.—Cædm. 99, 22. Thu sweltan scealt mid feoh and mid feorme: thou shalt perish with thy goods and substance.—Ibid. 161, 2. The Latinised form of the word is firma. Verum postquam tuta sunt opinati, conviviis provincialium, quæ vulgo firmam appellant, illecti, ad terram egrediuntur, ambo comites ex improviso eos invadunt, epulos cruore confundunt.—Orderic. Vital. in Duc. The modern sense of farm arose by degrees. In the first place lands were let on condition of supplying the lord with so many nights' entertainment for his household. Thus the Sax. Chron. A.D. 775, mentions land let by the abbot of Peterborough, on condition that the tenant should annually pay £50, and anes nihtes feorme, one night's entertainment. This mode of reckoning constantly appears in Doomsday-Book. Reddet firmam trium noctium: i. e. 100 libr. The inconvenience of payment in kind early made universal the substitution of a money payment, which was called firma alba, or blanche ferme, from being paid in silver or white money instead of victuals. Sometimes the rent was called simply firma, and the same name was given to the farm, or land from whence the rent accrued. Dare, or ponere ad firmam, to farm out, to let the usufruct for a certain rent.

From A.S. the word seems to have been adopted in Fr. ferme, a farm, or anything held in farm, a lease, which is explained by Diez from OFr. fermer, to engage.
Farrier. Originally a blacksmith, one who shoes horses. It. ferraro, ferratore, a farrier, horse-smith—Fl. ; Fr. fer de cheval, a horse-shoe ; ferrer, to shoe a horse.
To Farrow. Sw. farre, a boar ; faer-ria, Dan. fare, to farrow, or bring forth a litter of pigs. A.S. fearh, Du. varken, a little pig. Lat. verres, a boar ; Sp. guarro, -a, -illo, a boar, sow, pig. On the other hand, the Sw. far-galt, a boar, G. farre, A.S. fear, a bull, lead Ihre to derive the word from ON. fara, samfarast, to procreate, have intercourse with.
Farthing.—Ferlingr. A.S. feorthling, the fourth part of a coin, originally by no means confined to the case of a penny. This yere the kynge made a newe quyne as the nobylle, half nobylle, and ferdyng-nobylle.—Grey Friars' Chron. Cam. Soc.
Farthingale. Fr. vertugade, verdugalle, a fardingale.—Cot. Sp. verdugado, Ptg. verdugada, averdugada, a hooped petticoat, or stiffened support for spreading out the petticoats over the hips. The fashion seems to have come from the peninsula, and the name finds a satisfactory explanation in Sp., Ptg. verdugo, a rod or shoot of a tree, in Ptg. applied to a long plait or fold in a garment.—Roquete. Hence averdugada would signify a plaited petticoat in the same way in which from It. falda, a fold, we have faldiglia, any plaiting or puckering, also a safeguard that gentlewomen use to ride withal—Fl., a hoop-petticoat.—Altieri. The plaited structure of the garment explains the name of wheel-farthingale, the plaits by which it was stiffened standing out from the waist like the spokes of a wheel.
Fascinate. Lat. fascino, Gr. βασκαίνω, to bewitch. See Mask.
Fashion. Fr. façon (from Lat. facere, to make), the form or make of a thing.
Fast. 1.—To Fasten. OHG. fasti, ON. fastr, firm, secured, unbroken, solid, strong ; fastaland, the continent ; sækja at fast, to attack vigorously. Drekka fast, to drink hard, may be compared with the equivalent Da. drikke tæt: tæt, tight, close, compact. Mid.Lat. fast, immediately, without interval. It rains fast, the drops fall close on each other. Thus the idea of closeness passes into that of rapidity.
A fastness, G. festung, a strong hold or place of security. The transition from the idea of holding is so direct it can hardly be doubted that the word is radically connected with G. fassen, Du. vatten, to seize, to hold.
Fast. 2.—To Fast. Fast, abstinence from food. Here, as in the Latin abstinence, the idea may be, holding back from food. But if the word be of ecclesiastical origin it may be better explained from Goth. fastan, to keep or observe, viz. the ordinance of the church. Vitoda-fasteis, a keeper of the law. Wachter remarks that observare and jejunare are frequently used as synonymous by ecclesiastical writers. Abstinet, observat. — Isidore. Either way we come back to the element fast, signifying what is held close, firm, unbroken. A.S. æwfest, observant of the law, bound in wedlock, is opposed to Æwbrica, a breaker of the law, an adulterer.
Fastidious. Lat. fastidium, loathing for food, disgust, disdain.
Fat. G. fett, OHG. feitr.
Fate.—Fatal. Lat. fatum, that which is spoken, decreed, from fari, to speak ; whence fatalis, ordered by fate, deadly.
Father. Sanscr. pitri, Gr. πατήρ, Lat. pater, G. vater, ON. faðir.
Fathom. A.S. fæthm, a bosom, embrace, whatever embraces or incloses, an expanse. Ofer ealne foldan fæthm, over all the expanse of the earth. ON. faðma, Dan. fadme, to embrace ; ON. faðmr, bosom, embrace, the length one can reach with the two arms expanded. Sw. en famn hö, as much hay as can be held in the two arms. Du. vadem, the length of thread held out between the two arms, a fathom.—Kil. The root seems to be G. fassen, Du. vatten, to hold.
Fatigue. Lat. fatigare, Fr. fatiguer, to weary.
Fatuity, -fatuate. Lat. fatuus, a silly person, a fool.
Faucet. Fr. faulset, fausset, properly the short wooden pipe or mouthpiece that is inserted in a barrel for the purpose of drawing wine or beer, and is itself stopped with a plug or spigot. The origin is Fr. faulser, fausser, to make a failing, fault, or breach in anything, to transpierce. Faussée, a breach in a wall, a transpiercing ; faulser un ecu, une troupe, &c., to pierce or strike through a shield, to charge through a troop, &c. A fausset, then, is radically a piercer, and accordingly the term clepsidra, given as the Latin for fausset in the Promptorium, is explained in the Ortus as the same with docillus, Anglice a percer or a spygote. The expression of forcing a lock is perhaps a corruption of the Fr. faulser.
Faugh! Foh! Pah! Interjections expressing disgust at a bad smell.
Faugh! I have known a charnel-house smell sweeter.—B. & F.
Foh! one may smell in such a rill most rank. Shakesp.
Fie! fie! fie! pah! pah! give me an ounce of civet, good apothecary, to sweeten my imagination.—Shakesp.
The interjection is found in similar forms in most languages. Fr. pouah! faugh! an interj. used when anything filthy is shown or said.—Cot. G. puh! 'Hui puh! wie stank der alte mist.'—Sanders. Sp. pu! expressing disgust at a bad smell; fu! int. of disgust.—Neum. Du. foei! Bret. foei! fech! expressing disgust, horror, contempt. Gael. fich! nasty! expressing disgust or contempt.—Macleod.
The interj. I believe represents the lengthened emission of the breath, with screwed-up mouth and lifted nostrils, which aims at the rejection of an offensive smell. It will be observed that the syllable pu or fu is used in many languages as the root of words signifying to blow, as in Gr. φυσάω, E. puff, Sz. fujf, to blow; Sw. pusta. Fin. puhua, puhkia, puhaltaa, Let. puhst, to breathe, to blow; Magy. funi, fuvni, Galla afufa, to blow, Sanscr. phût, imitative sound of blowing; phût-kâra (phût-making), blowing; Magy. pihegni, pihenni to breathe, pant; piha! fie!
Again, the disgust felt at a bad taste closely resembles that arising from an offensive smell, and the exspiration by which we drive out the smell has only to be made a little stronger in order to spit out the disgusting morsel. Hence it is often hard to say whether the interj. of disgust represents the rejection of an offensive smell or the act of spitting. The G. interj. is variously written, pfu, pfy, pfui, pfah, pfuch, and Bav. pfugezen, to make the sound pfug, is applied to the spitting of a cat or the panting of a fat man. The G. pfui! is explained by Sanders as a fî! intensified to the pitch of actual or symbolical spitting. The act of spitting is probably represented also in Sw. twi! Russ. tfu! fie! The Galla twu represents the sound of spitting.—Tutschek. See Pooh!
Faulchion. See Falchion.
Fault. It. falta, a defect, want; Sp. falta, Fr. faulte, faute, defect, failing, omission, offence. According to Diez, from Lat. fallere, through a supposititious fallitare, Sp. faltar, It. faltare, to fail, to be wanting. But see Falter.
Favour. Lat. faveo, fautum, to be well-disposed to, to show good-will.
Fawn. The O'Fr. faon, feon, was applied to the young of animals in general, as of a lion, bear, dragon; faoner, feoner, to bring forth young, to lay eggs. Poitevin fedon, the foal of a horse or ass, from Lat. fœtus, as from feta (used by Virgil in the sense of sheep, properly breeding ewes), were formed Prov. feda, Piedm. fea, sheep. So from fetus, progeny, Walach. fet, child, fatâ, daughter; feta, to bear young; Sard. fêtu, progeny; Swiss fe, son, fedê, daughters.—Vocab. de Vaud.
Feal.—Fealty. It. fedele, Fr. fiel, from Lat. fidelis, faithful; Fr. fielté, fealty, fidelity.
*Fear.—Ferly. AS. fær, fear; færan, afæran, to frighten. OSw. fara, to fear; Sw. fara, danger. Det han ingen fara, there is no danger, which is the same thing as, there is no fear. Befara, to fear, to apprehend, to risk; forfæra, to frighten. Du. vaar, fear; gevaar, G. gefahr, danger.
The radical idea is probably shown in Sw. fasa, to shudder at, to be amazed at, fasa, horror; the final s changing into r, as in Lat. honos, honor, G. hase, E. hare; Du. verliezen, G. verlieren, &c. ON. ferligr, horrible, frightful, hideous.
And on the next when we were far from home, A ferly chance (whereon alone to think My hand now quales and all my senses fail) Gan us befall.—Gascoigne, Voyage to Holland.
Sw. farlig, dangerous, pernicious. From the tendency of what is sudden to startle and alarm, AS. færlic acquired the sense of sudden. It was also used (as fearful, awful, in familiar speech) to express an exaggerated degree of anything: fær-cyle, intense cold.
He felt him heavy and ferly sick.—R. Brunne.
The impressions of astonishment, amazement, and terror, border close upon each other. Thus Fr. effarer is translated by Cot. to amaze, as well as to scare, terrify, appal; effaré, scared, amazed, astonied. Then, with the signification softened down, Sc. and O.E. ferly, wonder, a strange event.
To Fease.—Feize.—Pheese. 1. To whip, to chastise. To fease or feag, virgis cædere.—Sk. Swiss fitzen, fausen, Du.

veselen, Fr. fesser, to whip, to switch; Swiss fitzer, rods for children.
2. To fuzz or ravel out, to break up into filaments. G. fasen, faseln, to ravel, fuzz, feaze.—Kütn. Faser, faschen, Pl.D. fassel, fiss, fissel (Danneil), Du. vese, vesel, fibre, filament; Swiss fätzen, to ravel out; fätzele, hanging threads or tatters; E. dial. fassings, hangings, fibres; tatters, tatters. 'I fasyll out as silke or velvet cloth; je raule.'—Palsgr. Fasylle of a cloth; fractillus, villus.—Pr. Pm. Sc. fass, a hair: 'not worth a fass.' Nich 'n fiss?' not an atom.—Danneil. Bav. fesen, husk, chaff; kein fesel, not an atom.
The sense of whipping is probably direct from the sound of a switch cutting through the air. The train of thought under the second head is not so clear. The radical image may be the fizzing of water from a hot surface, where the syllable fizz represents the sound made by a series of small explosions in which minute drops of water are scattered abroad. Thus to fizz or fuzz comes to signify to scatter or to fly off in small particles. But generally the notion of a whispering sound is connected with the motion of fine or small bodies, and thence with the notion of something fine and small. G. fispeln, fispern, to whisper, rustle, to move lightly to and fro. Du. veselen, to whisper, to ravel out.—Bomhoff. Swiss fauserlen, to float or fall in fine particles as mist or snow, to drizzle; fiselen, fisern, fiserlen, to move to and fro with a light thin implement, to scrawl or write too fine and thin, to drizzle, to ravel out in threads, to fiddle, to work minutely; fisel, a thin, poor creature, loose hanging threads; g'fiesel, scrawly writing; Bav. fiseln, to fiddle or twiddle with the fingers, to do light minute work. Pl.D. fisseln, to rain fine and thin, to ravel out.—Danneil.

Feasible. Fr. faisible, that may be done, from faire, to do.
Feast—Festival. Lat. festus, holiday, devoted to enjoyment; festum (tempus), It. festa, a holiday, festival, feast; festivo, festivale, festive.
Feat. -feat. -feit. 1. Lat. facio, factum, Fr. faire, to do; faict, fait, a deed, whence E. feat, a (notable) deed. Fr. defaire, to undo; defaite, an undoing, defeat.
2. Feat, fete, fetise, well-made, neat, dextrous, elegant; Fr. faict, done, achieved, accomplished; faictis, made after the fashion of another, also well-featured, well made, neat, feat, handsome.—Cot. See Fit.
Feather. ON. fiðr, Sw. fjäder, Dan. fjer, Du. veder, veer, Pol. pioro, Bohem. perj, feathers. Gr. πτερόν, a wing. Perhaps from a form like flader in G. flederwisch, a goose's wing, a feather broom, Bav. fledern, Du. vlederen, to flap, flutter, after the analogy of Bav. flitschen, to flap or flutter, flitschen, flitschelein, pinion, wing. The loss of the l would be justified by G. flittich, fittich, a wing, AS. fiugol, fugol, fowl; by E. badger corresponding to Fr. bladier; by E. splutter, sputter, &c.
Feature. OFr. faict, made; faicture, the workmanship, framing, making of a thing.—Cot. See Feat.
Febrile. See Fever.
-fect-. Lat. facio, factum, to make or do; in comp. -ficio, -fectum, as in Confection, Defect, Infect, Perfect, &c.
Federal.—Federate. Lat. fœdus, -eris, a league, a treaty.
Fee.—Fief.—Feudal. The importance of cattle in a simple state of society early caused an intimate connection between the notion of cattle and of money or wealth. Thus we have Lat. pecus, cattle; pecunia, money; and Goth. faihu, possessions, is identical with OHG. fihu, fehu, G. vieh, cattle, ON. fe, cattle, money, AS. feoh, cattle, riches, money, price, reward. Adopted into the Romance tongues the word became It. fio, Prov. feu, fieu, Fr. fief. When it received a Latin dress the introduction of a d, as in many other cases, to avoid the hiatus, produced the Mid.Lat. feudum, signifying the property in land distributed by the conqueror to his companions in arms, as a reward for their past services, and pledge for their rendering the like for the future. Hence the term fee, in E. law, for the entire estate in land; feoffment, from Fr. fieffer, to convey the fief, or fee, to a new owner. Fee has also been appropriated by custom to certain money-payments.
Feeble. OFr. floibe, flebe, fleble, Gris. fieivel, It. fievole, Fr. foible. The common derivation from Lat. flebilis, lamentable, is unsatisfactory. In words not far removed from a representative origin the preservation of parallel forms with a radical p and k, or b and g, is very common. Now we have E. flag, to grow limber, decay, wither—B.; and, corresponding to it, Lang. flaca, to bend, sink, give way. Mas cambos flacon, my legs bend under me. Hence flac, fla, Fr. flaque, weak, feeble, faint, flaggy.—Cot. In the same way we pass from the image of a flapping sheet to the sense of want of stiffness in Fr. flappi (in a flapping condition), faded—c. nouv. nouv. ; flappe, soft, faded, over-ripe—Gloss. Genevois ; E. flabby, flaccid, in-elastic, soft ; Fr. flebe, fleve, flewe—Pat. de Champ., Pl.D. flop, flep, flau—Brem. Wtb., Du. flaauw, weak, feeble, faint.
Corresponding verbal forms are Lang. flepi, fepli, fipla, fibla, exactly synonymous with flaca above mentioned. Fibla uno amarino, to bend a switch.—Dict. Lang. M' a calgut fibla, I was forced to yield.—Dict. Castr. Feple, fible, Prov. feble, fible, weak, faint. La luna es fiblo, the moon is on the wane.
To Feed. See Food.
* To Feel. AS. felan, G. fuhlen, Du. voelen, to feel. The ON. fjalla, to touch, finger, feel, approaches very closely. And this last seems to be from fjatl, a fiddling movement of the fingers, actus levis, frivolus (Haldorsen); fjatla, to fumble; fitla, leviter digitos admovere ; fitla við, leviter attingere ; fidra við, leviter tangere ; N. fitla, fjatla, to fumble, as one trying to untie a knot.
To Feign.—Feint. Lat. fingere, to form, frame, make, contrive, pretend. Fr. feindre, to feign, and from the past ptcp. feint, E. feint, a pretence. In like manner Mod.Gr. κάμνω, to do, to make ; κάμνομαι, to feign, pretend ; καμνωτής, a maker, a dissembler.
Felicity. Lat. felix, -icis, happy.
Fell. I. Goth. fill, ON. fell, felldr, Du. vel, Lat. pellis, skin. 2. ON. fjall, mountain.
To Fell. See Fall. To fell a seam, to turn it down, is Gael. fill, fold, wrap, plait ; Sw. fall, a fold, a hem, falla, to hem.
Fell.—Felon. It. fello, cruel, moody, murderous—Fl. ; Fr. felle, cruel, fierce, untractable ; felon, cruel, rough, untractable ; felonie, anger, cruelty, treason, any such heinous offence committed by a vassal against his lord whereby he is worthy to lose his estate.—Cot. Diez rejects the derivation from Lat. fel, gall, but his suggestion from OHG. fillo, a skinner, scourger, executioner, is not more satisfactory. The true origin is probably to be found in the Celtic branch. W. gwall, defect ; Bret. gwall, bad, wicked, defect, fault, crime, damage ; gwall-ober, to do ill ; gwalla, to injure. In the same language fall, poor, sick, bad ; fallaat, to weaken, to decay ; fallacr, wicked, villain ; fallaen, weakness, fainting ; fallentez, wickedness, malice, malignity ; falloni, perfidy, treachery; fallout, or fellout, to fail, be wanting. Gael. feall, deceive, betray, fail, treason, treachery; feallan, a felon, traitor; feall-duine, a worthless man ; feall-leigh, a quack doctor ; fealltair, a traitor, villain.
Fellow. OE. felaw, ON. felagi, a partner in goods ; samfe-lag-skap, partnership, a laying together of goods, from fe, money, goods, and lag, order, society, community. At liggia lag við einn, to enter into partnership with him. Honum fylgdi kona at lagi, a woman accompanied him as concubine. So fisk-lagi, a partner in fishing, brod-lagi, a partner at meals, a companion ; Sw. seng-laga, a bed-fellow. Pl.D. gelag, a company of drinkers ; lages-broer, gelages-broer, a boon companion.
Here now make y the Myn owne felow in al wise, Of worldly good and merchandise. Child of Bristowe, Lydgate.
Felly.—Felloe. G. felge, Du. velghe, rad-velghe, the crooked pieces which compose the circumference of a wheel.
Felon. I. See Fell. 2. Guernsey flon, a whitlaw, from Fr. furoncle, froncle, a felon, uncome, whitlaw.—Cot. Herbe au flon, E. mate-felon, centaurea nigra. Lat. furunculus (dim. of fur, thief), a boil or abscess.
Felt.—Filter. G. filz, Du. vilt, It. felze, felt cloth made by working wet wool together. Felzata, the stuff of which a barge's tilt is made ; feltro, a felt, felt hat, felt cloak.—Fl. Fr. feutre, felt, also a filter, a piece of felt, or thick woollen cloth to strain things through.—Cot. Pol. pils'c, felt ; Bohem. plst, plstenice, a felt hat. Gr. πῖλος, felt, or anything made of felt ; πιλέω, πιλῶ, to make into felt, compress, thicken ; Lat. pileus, a felt hat or cap ; Russ. voilok, felt ; It. follare, to felt or thicken ; folto, thick, close ; foltrello, as feltro, a little felt—Fl. ; Lat. fullo, a thickener of cloth. Manx poll, to mat or stick together, polley, felting, pollan, a saddle cloth. The invention of felt would probably be made among pastoral nations at an exceedingly early period, and the name would, most likely be transmitted with the invention. The resemblance to several words of similar meaning may be accidental. Lat. pilus, hair ; villus, a lock, shaggy hair ; Fin. willa, wool ; W. gwallt, Gael. falt, hair of the head.
Female. — Feminine. Fr. femelle, from Lat. fœmina. The form of the word has been unconsciously altered in E. to bring it in relationship to male, with which it has no real connection. Male and female were formerly written maule and femelle. Fris. faem, faamen, faamel, AS. famne, a maid, woman. The designation of a woman is most likely to be taken from the characteristic of child-bearing, typified by the womb or belly, which are often confounded under a single name. The Lap. waimo signifies the heart or intestines, while in Fin. it signifies a woman ; waimoinen, womanly, feminine. Sc. wame, waim, weam, the womb, belly ; wamyt, pregnant.—Jam.

Fen. ON. fen, a morass ; fen-votr, thoroughly wet. Goth. fani, mud. The OE. fen was also used in the sense of mud, filth.

-fence, -fend. As in offend, defend. The radical sense of OLat. fendo, fensum, only found in comp., must be gathered from offendo, to dash or strike against, thence to displease, offend. Defendo, to ward off, is probably formed as the opposite of offendo rather than direct from the simple verb.

Fend.—Fender.—Fence. From Fr. defendre, to forbid, defend, protect ; defense, prohibition, protection, fence. A similar omission of the particle de in the adoption of a Fr. word is seen in the rout of an army, from Fr. deroute.

The art of fencing or sword-playing was termed the science of defence, as Fr. s'escrimer, to fence, from G. schirm, protection, shelter.

The fence-months were those in which it was unlawful to chase in the forests, from defense—in the sense of prohibition.

Fenowed.—Vinewed, Mouldy, musty. AS. finie, gefinegod, decayed ; Du. vinnig, rancid, mouldy. Gael. fineag, fionag, a cheese mite. The primary meaning of fenowed would thus be moth or mite-eaten, then mouldy, corrupt. W. gwiddon, mites, small particles of what is dried, or rotted ; gwiddonog, mity, rotten.

-fer-. Lat. fero, to bear, whence confer, defer, infer, circumference, &c.

Fere. AS. gefera, a companion, one who fares or goes with one.

Ferly. Wonder. See Fear.

Ferment. Lat. fermentum (for fervimentum, from ferveo, to boil), what causes bread to swell up like water boiling ; leaven.

Fern. OHG. faran, farati, farn, farn, Du. vaeren, vaeren-kruyd. Probably named from the reputed use of the seed in magical incantations, being supposed to confer the power of going invisible.

Fougire (fern), plante dont se servent les pretendus sorciers.—Vocab. de Vaud.

The Sw. verb fara, to go, as Ihre remarks, is specially applied to events produced by diabolic art. Far-sot, a sickness produced by incantation, thence an epidemic. AS. fær-death, fær-cwealme, sudden death. Du. vaerende-wiif, a witch, enchantress ; Sc. fare-folkis, fairies.

Ferocious. Lat. ferox, ferocis, fierce.

Ferrel.—Ferule, 1. A ferrel or verril, Fr. virole, an iron ring put about the end of a staff, &c., to keep it from riving.—Cot. Virer, to veer or turn round. 2. Lat. ferula, Fr. ferule, a rod or palmer used for correction in schools. Lat. ferula, a bamboo, cane, rod, switch.

Ferret, 1. Spun silk and riband woven from it. It. fioretto, Fr. fleuret, coarse ferret-silk—Fl. ; floret-silk.—Cot. G. florett, the outer envelop of the silk-cod, flirt or flurt-silk, ferret-silk, ferret. Florett-band, a ferret riband.—Kütn.

2. G. frette, frett-wiesel. It. furetto, feretto, Fr. furet, a ferret, an animal used in hunting rabbits or rats in holes otherwise inaccessible.

It is commonly supposed that the name of the animal has given rise to the verb signifying to poke in holes and corners, to search out. It. ferettare, furettare, to ferret or hunt in holes, to grope or fumble—Fl. ; Fr. fureter, to search, hunt, boult out, spy narrowly into every hole and corner.—Cot.

It is more likely that the ferret (exclusively a tame animal) is named from the purpose for which it is kept, viz. for rooting or poking in holes for rabbits or vermin. The G. frettwiesel would signify a weasel kept for the purpose designated by the verb fretten. Dan. affritte, udfritte, to ferret out, worm out.

Now we have Prov. fretar, Fr. frotter, G.-v. fretten, to rub, to move to and fro over a surface. Moreover, fretten is identified with E. dial. froat, Du. wroeten, by the common use of the three in the peculiar sense of to drudge, to earn with pains and difficulty. Wroeten is also to poke the fire, to poke or root in the ground as a pig with his snout. The same train of thought is found in Prov. fregar, It. fregare, to rub, frugare, to rub, to pinch and spare miserably, to grope, to furegare, furegare (for ferugare), to fumble or grope for, to sweep an oven. And as fregare, frugare give rise to furegare by the insertion of an e (as in umberella for umbrella), so fretten, frotter, wroeten, are converted by a similar change into It. ferettare, (feru-tare) furetare.
The strongest objection to the fore-going explanation is Fr. furon (Pat. de Champ.), Sp. huron, a ferret. But fure-gare, furettare, to poke, grope, or search out, have so much the appearance of diminutives from a simple furare, that furon may well have been formed from that hypothetical form in the same way as It. furegone from furegare, and with the same sense of poker, searcher-out.
Ferry. See Fare.
Fers. The Queen at Chess.—Chaucer. OFr. fierce, fierche, fierge, from Pers. ferz, a general. The confusion of fierge with vierge may perhaps have led to the alter-ation of the Fr. designation to Dame, or Reine, E. Queen.
Fertile. Lat. fertilis, from fero, to bear, produce.
Fervent, -fervesce. Lat. ferveo, to be hot ; fervesco, to begin to boil.
Fescue. A small straw used as a pointer in spelling. Fr. festu, It. festuca, a straw.
-fess.—Confess.—Profess. Lat. fateor, fassus sum, in comp. fiteor, -fessus, to own, avow. Hence confiteor, to con-fess ; profiteor, to profess. Fateor itself seems a secondary form from fari, fatus sum, to speak.
To Fester. To putrefy, corrupt.—B. Wall. s'éfister, se corrompre, s'empuanter ; dialect of Aix fiesen, to begin to smell disagreeably.—Grandg. ; Pl.D. fistrig, fusty, ill-smelling, as a close chamber.—Danneil.
Festoon. Fr. feston. It. festone, any kind of great wreath, garland, or chaplet made of boughs, leaves, or flowers, much used in Italy on their church-doors at the celebration of their feasts; also branchworks.—Fl. We have the testi-mony of Virgil that the temples were adorned in the same way on festive occa-sions among the Romans. Templum festâ fronde revinctum.—Æn. v. 459.
To Fetch. 1. Fetchyn, or fettyn, af-fero.—Pr. Pm. AS. feccan, fettan, feti-gean. Fris. fetje, fetgje, to seize.—Outzen. Sw. fatta, G. fassen, to seize ; Bav. fessen, to bring home ; korn, weinfessen, to get in the harvest, vintage. ' He's married a wife, and he's fessen her hame.' ON. at fá (eg fæ, feck, hefi fengid), to get.
2. Fetch, a trick.
'Twas Justice Bramble's fetch to get the wench. Bav. fätzen, to jest, play tricks, jeer one with words or tricks.—Schmeller. G. fatzen, faxen, tricks. The radical image consists of rapid action to and fro, repre-sented by forms like fick-fack, fitsch-fatsch, &c. See Fidget.
Fetch.—Fetch-candle. The appari-tion of one who is alive.—Hal. Fetch-lights, fetch-candles, corpse-candles, or dead-men's candles, are appearances seen at night, as of candles in motion, sup-posed to be in attendance on a ghostly funeral, and to portend the death of some one in the neighbourhood.—Brand's Popular Superstitions. The superstition obviously agrees with the notion of the Will o' the wisp or ignis fatuus, which is known in Holland by the name of Dood-keerse, death-candle, or dead-man's candle.
The name might plausibly be explained as if the apparition were something sent to fetch the fated person to the other world, but probably it has a more ancient origin than would be indicated by such a derivation. The Vætt in Scandinavian mythology is a kind of goblin supposed to dwell in mounds and desert places, and the ignis fatuus is called in Norway Vatte-lys, the Vatt's candle, the identity of which with the Pembrokeshire Fetch-light, or Fetch-candle, can hardly be doubted.
Fetiche. Fr. fétiche, a material thing, made the object of worship in W. Africa. Ptg. feitiço, sorcery, charm. Lat. factitius.
Fetid. Lat. fœtidus, from fœteo, to stink. There can be little doubt that it springs from a form of the interjection of disgust corresponding to E. faugh ! foh ! Bret. foei ! fech! in the same way that putidus, stinking, and puteo, to stink, are from another form of the same interjec-tion seen in Sp. pu ! G. puh ! expressive of disgust at a bad smell.
From the first-mentioned form of the interj. is also Lat. fœdus, foul, repugnant to the physical or moral senses, Sp. feo, hideous, ugly. Comp. Du. foei! faugh! and, as an adj., foul.—Kil.
Fetlock. The hair that grows behind on a horse's feet.—B. Now generally applied to the joint on which the hair in question grows. We should naturally resolve the word into foot-lock, in accord-ance with Sw. huf-skägg, hoof-beard ; but Swiss fiesloch, fisloch, Du. vitlok, vitslok (Halma in v. fanon), the pastern of a horse, lead in another direction. Pl.D. fiss, fine thread, fibres—Danneil ; Swiss fisel, gefisel, loose, unravelled threads hanging from a garment, also the fetlock or long hair growing on the pastern.—Stalder. G. fitze, fisse. Da. fid, fed, a skein or bundle of threads; Sw. dial. fittja, a bundle of hemp or flax, bunch of thread. See to Feaze, -Fitters. The resemblance to G. fessel, the pastern, seems accidental.

Fetter. AS. feotur, fœter, Du. veter, ON. fiöt, fjötr, shackles, bonds. ON. fjotra, impedire, f. hest, to hobble a horse; N. fjetra, applied to the act of hunters, who are supposed to stay by charms the flight of the beast they are pursuing; literally, to fix to his footsteps, to set fast, to render immovable; fjetra, set fast, immovable from wonder or surprise. From ON. fet, Dan. fjed, Sw. fjat, footstep. Lat. impedire, to hinder; pedica, Gr. πεδίον, a shackle; πεδιάω, to hinder, to stop.

To Fettle. To set in order, to repair anything that is broken or defective, to set about anything; fettle, good condition, proper repair. I am inclined to believe that the primary meaning of the word is to do light fiddling work, to give the last touches required for the preparations of a thing. Thus Swift recommends the footman when he knows his master to be most busy 'to come in and pretend to fettle about the room.' ON. fitla, leviter digitos admovere; fitla vid, leviter attingere (Hald.), palpito, modicum tango vel apparo.—Gudm. Sw. dial. futtla, to fumble with the fingers; fessla, to tickle, to touch lightly. Bav. fiseln, to make light movements with the fingers; fis'l-arwet (fisl-arbeit), light fiddling work; fuseln, to be occupied with trifles; Pl.D. fiseln, to pass the fingers gently over, to tickle; fisseln, to be occupied in cleaning, to set the house in order; fisselmäken (fettle-maid), an under-housemaid. Fr. vétiller, to tickle, to trifle.—Cot. See Feaze, Fiddle.

Feud. OHG. gifihida, Goth. fiathva, enmity, from Goth. fian, AS. fian, fean, to hate. G. fehd, fehde, AS. fæhth, Mid.Lat. faida, the revenge pursued by the relations of a murdered man, and the legitimate state of warfare ensuing thereon. 'Vindicta parentum, quod faidam dicimus.'—Duc. AS. fæhth-bote, the sum paid to the relations of the murdered man to make up a feud. Du. veede, vied, veete, vee, hatred, quarrel.—Kil.

Feudal. See Fee.

Fever. Fr. fièvre, Lat. febris. From the notion of shivering. Bav. fibern, fippern vor Zorn, vor Begierde, to tremble with anger or desire.—Schm. Du. beven, G. bebern, beben, to tremble; Devon. bivering, shaking. Lat. vibro, E. quiver, are closely related.

Feverfew. An herb good against fevers.—B. Lat. febrifuga, from fugare, to put to flight.

Few. Goth. favs, pl. favai, little, few; ON. fár, fá, fátt, OHG. foho, AS. feawa, Lat. paucus.

Fewel. Mid.Lat. focale (from focus, hearth, fire), OFr. fouaille, supply of wood for the fire, or right of cutting it. 'Et sunt spinæ crescentes in Lonedon pro focali.'—Mon. Angl. in Duc. In like manner fouage, fouile, from focagium, focata.

Fewterer. One who had charge of the dogs of chase. It. veltro, a greyhound; Fr. vaultre, a boar-hound; vaultrey, a kennel of vautres.

To Fey. To cleanse meadows, ponds, &c.—B. G. fegen, to cleanse, scour, sweep.

Fib. An euphemism for a lie. It. fiabbare, to sing merry tunes and idle songs, as nurses do in rocking their children, also to tell flim-flam tales.—Fl. Fabbin, flattering.—Craven Gloss. Fible-fable, nonsense.—Hal. Compare Pol. bajka, a nursery tale, a lie.

Fibre. Lat. fibra, a jag or pointed extremity; related to fimbria, fringe.

Fickle. AS. ficol, vacillating; G. ficken, to move quickly to and fro. See Fidget.

Fictile.—Fiction. Lat. fingo, fictum, to fashion, form, properly to mould in clay or plastic material; to devise, contrive, feign; fictor, one who makes or forms; fictilis, made of clay, earthenware; fictus, feigned, fictitious.

* Fiddle. G. fiedel, Du. vedele, vele—Kil., OHG. fidula, Mid.Lat. vitula, Prov. viula, It. viola. Commonly derived from Lat. fides, fidicula, a musical string, stringed instrument. But the fiddle, as Ihre remarks, was unknown to the Romans, and the name may well be traced to a native source in forms like those indicated under Fidge and Fease, expressive of the light rapid movements by which the instrument is played. ON. fiðra, fitla, to touch lightly, to palpitate.—Gudm. G. fitscheln, fitzeln, to move to and fro.—Sanders. Swab. fidlen, fitschen, fitschlen, fitschefatschlen, to whittle with a blunt knife, to work lightly and ineffectually. E. fiddle-faddle, trifling occupation, idle talk. 'Fiddling work, where abundance of time is spent and little done.'—Swift. The passage from the jigging movement of the arm to the designation of the fiddle is clearly shown in Bav. figken, ficken, to switch with a rod, to make quick movements to and fro ; figkeln (in a depreciatory way), to play on the fiddle ; figkelbogen, a fiddlebow. ' Figela, fidel ; figelator, fidelar.'—Gl. in Schm. So also Swiss fiselen, fieseln, to switch to and fro, to fiddle about a thing, work in a trifling manner ; fiseler, one who strums upon an instrument ; fiselbogen, a fiddlebow.

Fidelity. Lat. fides, faith, fidelis, faithful.

To Fidge.—Fidget. To make light involuntary movements, to be unable to keep still. To fidge about, to be continually moving up and down.—B. Swiss fitschen, to flutter to and fro, jump up and down ; whence children are called fitsch, fitschli. Fitzen, to switch with a rod.—Stalder. E. dial. to fig, to fidget about.—Hal. Swiss figgen, to rub, shove, or move to and fro, to fidget. Sc. fike, to be restless, to be in a constant state of trivial motion ; fick-facks, minute, troublesome pieces of work ; OE. fykyn, or fiskyn about in idleness, vagor.—Pr. Pm. Du. ficken, fickelen, to whip, to switch, fick-facken, factitare, agitare.—Kil. G. fick-facken, to fidget, move about without apparent end, to play tricks.—Kütn. Ficken, to make short quick movements, to rub to and fro.—Sanders. "The motion of a light object through the air is represented in G. by the imitative syllables futsch! (Sand.), pfutsch! (Schm.), witsch! wutsch! watsch! ritsch! wisch! (Sand.).

Fie ! Fr. fi! Gael. fich! Bret. fech! Ir. fi! G. fi! pfui! Lith. pui! Illyrian pi! Sw. twi! Interjections of reprobation, originally expressing disgust at a bad smell or offensive mouthful. See Faugh!

Fief. See Fee.

Field. G. feld, Du. veld, the open country, soil, plain, level country. ON. völlr, field, meadow ; Sw. wall, grassy soil, meadow, plain ; walla sig (of the soil), to cover itself with a sward of turf. Dan. dial. falle, the green sward, land lying in grass that has to be ploughed ; fiald, an inclosed portion of cultivated soil, field of rye or potatoes. Sc. fale, feal, any grassy part of the surface of the ground ; fiail-dyke, a turf wall. Gael. fàl, a sod. W. gwellt, grass.

Field-fare. A kind of thrush. AS. fealofor, from fealo, yellowish, fallow-coloured.

Fiend. Goth. fijands, fiands, G. feind, enemy ; ON. fijandi, enemy, fiend, devil. From the pple. pr. of the verb fijan, fian, ON. fiá, to hate, which itself is formed from the interj. fi! expressive of disgust, reprobation, displeasure. Speaking of interjections, Palsgrave says, ' Some betoken abhorring, as fy or fuy.' From W. fi! fie! are formed fiaid, loathsome ; fieiddio, to loathe, detest. In the same way from Russ. fu!, fzikati, to cry fu!, to abhor, detest ; from Du. foei!, verfoeien, to abhor. So also Gael. fuath (th silent), hatred, aversion, fuathaich, to hate, loathe, detest, from the primary form of the interj. fu! See Faugh, Foul.

* Fierce. Fr. feroce, Lat. ferox, which may perhaps be explained from Boh. frkati, frtiti, fremere, ferocire, to snort with rage.

Fife. G. pfeife. It. piffaro, Fr. fifre. Like Lat. pipio, Gr. πιππίζω, E. peep, pipe, from the representation of a shrill note.

Fight. AS. feoht, fyht, G. fecht, fight. Swiss fechten, fichten, to work in a hurried manner, with the notion of much movement ; erfiechten, to get a thing done by diligent work ; Sw. fika, to pursue with eagerness, ardently desire, strive for ; fikt, earnest endeavour. ' Han stod emot then Lithurgium med alla fikt.' he opposed the Liturgy with all his might. E. dial. fick, to struggle or fight with the legs, as a child in a cradle.—Grose. N. fikta ma haandom, to throw the hands about as if striking.—Aasen. The radical idea thus seems the throwing about the hands and arms. See Fidget.

Figure. Lat. figura, from fingo, to make, form. See Fiction.

Filament. See File, 2.

Filberd. Quasi fill-beard, a kind of nut which just fills the cup made by the beards of the calyx. In an ordinary hasel the nut projects to a considerable distance beyond the beard.

To Filch. To steal small matters. Swiss Flöke, subducere, clam auferre.—Idioticon Bernense in Deutsch. Mundart. N. pilka, Sc. pilk, to pick. ' She has pilkit his pouch.'—Jam. N. plikka, to pluck.

File. 1. OHG. vihila, figila, from figen, to rub.—Schwenck. But Bohem. pila, a saw ; pilnjk, a file ; piliti, to saw, to file.

File. 2. -file. File, in the sense of rank, order, is from Lat. filum, a thread, Fr. fil, a thread, line, streak, rank, course, row.—Cot. Fr. défiler, to defile or march in a line one after the other.

Filial. Lat. filius, a son.

Filigree. Formerly filigrain. Evelyn 17 in the Fop's Dictionary describes fili-grained work as 'whatever is made of silver wire-work.'—R. Sp. Filigrana, a kind of work in which the entire texture or grain of the material is made up of twisted gold or silver wire, from filo, wire, and grano, the grain or direction of the fibres of wood or other fibrous matters.—Neumann.

To Fill.—Full. The primary meaning of fill seems to be to pour liquids, in which sense the G. füllen is still used. Ein fass wein auf fläschchen füllen, to bottle wine. The connection with the notion of fullness is obvious. Lith. pillu, pilti, to pour, pour into, fill full ; pilnas, full ; showing that the radical meaning of Lat. implere must be to pour into, whence plenus, identical with Lith. pilnas, full.

Fillet. I. Fr. filet (dim. of fil, thread), a little thread, string, or twist ; whence a fillet, a hair-lace, or ribbon to tie up the hair.
2. The Fr. filet is also the band of flesh which lies along under the backbone of animals, filet de bœuf, de veau. When served at table, however, the filet de bœuf appears as a solid lump without bone, whence perhaps the fillet of veal may have been so named, as being a similar boneless lump, although taken from a different part of the animal. It may however be from being bound together by a fillet or bandage.

Fillip. A fillip, flip, or flirt with the fingers, from an imitation of the sound, or rather perhaps from the analogy between the nature of the act and the short quick action of the vocal organs by which the word is pronounced.

Filly. See Foal.

Film. AS. film, a skin, fylmen, a membrane. 'E.Fris. fliem, flee, a thin skin. OFris. fimel, filmene, the skin of the body.'—Richthofen. W. pilen, cuticle, rind ; pilio, to peel ; pilionen, a thin peel, a film.

Filter. See Felt.

Filth. See Foul.

Fimble. G. femel, femel-hanf, fimmel, the male-plants of hemp which are soonest ripe, and have to be picked out by hand from among the female, left to ripen their seed. The larger and stronger growth of the seed-bearing plants probably led to their being called in England carl, or male-hemp, and this perhaps has led to the supposition that fimble is a corruption of female, as the word is commonly explained. The real signification is the act of picking out the early ripe plants, which is termed fimmeln in G., and femeler in the North of France, while the plants so picked out are called femeles.—Hécart.
The Du. fimelen, or femelen, is applied to any light action with the fingers, to tease wool, flax, or hemp, to trifle, gesticulari digitis, frustra factitare rem frivolam. Femel, cannabis brevior, discerpta, convulsa, linum carptum, vulsum.—Kil.
The verb is a dim. of Fris. fample, to grasp at anything with the hands.—Outzen ; Sw. famla, to grope. See Famble.
To fimble, to touch lightly and frequently with the ends of the fingers.—Forby.
OFris. fipla, Dan. dial. fiple, to touch with the fingers, to handle.

Fin. AS. finna, Dan. finne, Lat. pinna, a feather, or fin. Probably from the sharp spines in such fins as those of a perch. Du. vimme, vinne, vlimme, pinna, squama et arista.—Kil. G. finne, top of a mountain, point of a hammer, fin of a fish.

Finance. See Fine.

Finch.—Spink. G. finke, Lat. frigilla, frigilla, a small bird, from a representation of the chirp ; fringutire, frigutire, to chirp or twitter. It. frinco, frinsone, frinsone; Fr. frinson, pinson, a spink or chaffinch. The loss or insertion of the r in a like situation in imitative words is very common. Compare Lat. fricare, to rub, with G. ficken, to move to and fro.

To Find. G. finden, fand, gefunden. ON. finna.

Fine.—Finance. In the forensic language of the middle ages the Lat. finis was specially applied to the termination of a suit, sc. finalis dies, finale judicium, finalis concordia, were respectively the day of trial, the judicial decision, or the agreement by which the suit was terminated. Finis by itself is frequently used for the settlement of a claim by composition or agreement, as by Matthew Paris in the Life of Hen. III. ' Clanculo captus fuit, et tacito facto fine, interpositis fide et juramentis et chartis, caute dimissus.'—Dict. Etym. ' Quod illi cognoscentes et malum timentes acceperunt consilium inter se ut si quo modo possent foedus cum Imperatore componerent, dicentes, Nullum ulterius ab eo finem habebimus (we shall get no further terms from him), sed junctus Romanis omnes nos de partibus illis expellet.'—Duc. The clergy and females who held in capite, having been summoned to London to pass over with the king on military duty into France, it was announced, ' quod archiepiscopi, &c., servitium domino regi debentes possent facere finem pro eodem (might compound for it) si vellent.'—Bart. Cotton, p. 324. It was then transferred to the money paid as the price of settlement, and Lat. finare, finire, Fr. finer, were used in the sense of paying an exaction or composition. ' Omnes vero plagæ aut feritæ—quæ evenerint—sicut supra decretum est finiantur,' shall be compounded for.—Duc. ' Lui dit qu'il ne le laisserait point aller jusqu'à ce qu'il eust finé à luy, et force luy fut finer au chevalier à cinq cens livres.'—Joinville. Soixante mile doubles vous ferai amener Se parmi ceste fin vous me volez quiter. Chron. Duguesclin, 13627.

Hence fin in E. and the derivative finance in Fr. were used in the sense of an exaction or compulsory payment. Monstrelet informs us that Jacques Cœur was made prisoner, ' pource qu'il a extorqué indeuement plusieurs grands finances sur le pays du Roi, tant en Languedoc, Languedouy, comme ailleurs.' The name of finance was subsequently extended to all monies levied on the people for the behoof of the royal treasure or revenue.

Fine. G. fein, It. fino, Fr. fin. Diez adheres to the derivation from Lat. finitus, finished, perfect, and in confirmation cites Prov. clin from clinatus, Sp. cuerdo from cordatus, manso from mansuetus. ' Quod excellentem vel optimum gradum bonitatis obtinet finum vel finissimum vulgariter appellatur.'—Johan. à S. Geminiano in Duc.

A more probable origin may be found in W. gwyn, white, fair, pleasant; Gael. fionn, white, fair, fine, pleasant, sincere, true; ON. fina, to polish, to cleanse, finn, bright, polished. The idea of white passes readily to that of pure, unsullied, unmixed, as in fine gold, on the one hand, or to that of brilliancy, or showiness, as in fine clothes, on the other.

The sense of small, delicate, may arise from the application of the term to fabrics where smallness of parts is an excellence, or it may be a separate word, from W. main. Slender, fine, thin, small (Lat. minor, Fr. menu, mince); lliain main, fine linen; diodfain, small beer.

Finger. Goth. figgrs, Fris. fenger, fanger. From the equivalent of G. fangen, to seize, the change of vowel from a to i perhaps indicating the light action of a finger.

Finical.—Finikin. Du. fijnkens, perfectè, concinnè, bellè.—Kil. Hence finikin, particular in dress, trifling.—Craven Gloss.

Gloss. Finical, over-refined, effeminate.

Fir.—Furze, G. föhre, ON. fura, E. fir is the general name of trees with needle-shaped leaves. Then from the sharp spines, which are the only apparent representatives of leaves in a plant of wholly different nature, the name of firres or firs was given to the bush now called furze or gorse.

Fire. G. feuer, ON. fyr, fur, Gr. πῦρ.

Firk. Any smart movement with a light object, as a blow with a switch, a jerk.

As tumblers do, when betwixt every feat They gather wind by firking up their breeches. A firk of law, a trick of law; a firk of piety, a sudden fit of piety. To firk, to beat, to whip.—B.

The origin is a representation of the sound made by a blow with a switch. Fr. fric-frac, mot dont le peuple se sert pour exprimer un bruit qu'on fait en frappant à droit et à gauche.—Trevoux.

AS. frician, to dance. As jerk varies with jert, so firk may be considered as the representative of It. ferza, sferza, a whip, and may also explain Lat. virga, a rod.

Other representations of the same original image are fick, flick, flirk (Du. vlercken, to flirt), flirt, all signifying short rapid movements to and fro, from the sound of a blow with a switch or light implement.

Firkin. A diminutive from four; a vessel holding nine gallons, the fourth part of a barrel of thirty-six gallons. Compare Sc. firlot, a measure containing a fourth part of a boll of meal.

Firm. —firm. — Firmament. Lat. firmus, strong. The firmament was the fixed framework of the sky, about which the heavenly bodies were carried round.

First. What is most to the fore, most in front. ON. fyri, fyrir, for, before; fyrri (comparative), first of two; fyrstr (superl.), in front of all, first. Lith. pirm, before, pirmas, first; Lat. præ, before, primus, first.

Firth. See Frith.

Fiscal. Lat. fiscus, a money-bag, thence the money-store, or treasury of the empire.

Fish. I. Goth. fisks, Lat. piscis, W. pysg, Gael. iasg, Gr. ἰχθύς.

2. Counters at cards. From Fr. ficher, to fix, the subst. fiche is used for a gardener's dibble, for the iron pegs used to mark distances in surveying, for branches stuck in the ground to mark positions in setting out a camp; fiche or fichet, the peg used in marking at cribbage or the.

like. Hence, in defiance of etymology, the term was transferred to the loose counters which serve to mark the state of the game at cards, and was adopted in E. under the form of fish.
To Fisk. To run about hastily and heedlessly.—B. A word of similar formation to Jig, fidge, firk, whisk. Sw. fjaska, to fidget.
Fissile.—Fissure. Lat. findo, fissum, to cleave, split.
Fist. OE. fust, G. faust, the hand used as an instrument of striking. Swiss fausten, fuusten, to beat with fist or stick; W. ffusto, to beat; ffust-fa, a beating, a boxing match; ffust, a flail; Lat. fustis, a stick; Bret. fusta, to give a sound thrashing.
Fit. I. A portion of music or of song, a canto. AS. fittian, to sing. Feond on fitte, exulting in song.—Cædm. Nu ic fitte gen ymb fisca cynn, now I will sing again concerning the races of fish.
* 2. A sudden attack of pain or illness, an intermittent period. Sw. dial. futt, a moment, very short interval of time. From the representation of a short rapid movement as by fft! fft! interj. expressing sudden disappearance.—Sand. Bav. pjutsch! expressing a quick momentary movement; pfitzsn, pfitschen, pfutschen, to make a noise represented by the syllable in question, to move with such a noise. Alls pfitz, &c. very at once. Swab. pfitzen, to move with a sudden start, to disappear.
To Fit.—Refit. Fr. faict, fait, wrought, fashioned [for a purpose]; faictis, made after the likeness of another, neat, feat, comely; faictissement, neatly, featly, trimly, fitly.—Cot. Reficio, to again-stable, or to refete; refecyd, or refetyd, refectus.—Pr. Pm. A faited a mes mains à bataille, he fitted my hands to war.—Livre des Rois. Du. metten, convenire, quadrare, accommodare.—Kil.
Fitchet.—Fitchew. Fr. fissau, a pole-cat. Du. visse, fisse, vitsche, putorius, mustela; genus valde putidum.—Kil. Wal. s'éfister, s'empuanter.—Grandg. Fr. vesseur, a fyster, a stinking fellow.—Cot.
Fitters. Fragments, splinters.
. Cast them upon the rocks and splitted them all to fitters.—North's Plutarch. Only their bones and ragged fitters of their clothes remained.—Coryat in Nares.
Fitters, fatters, tatters.—Craven Gloss. The idea of breaking to bits is commonly expressed by words signifying violent shaking, which are themselves taken in the first instance from the representation of a broken, quivering sound. Thus, from shiver, to shake, we have shivers, fragments; and Dickens in the 'Haunted House' uses dither (primarily signifying tremble) in the same sense, 'all shaken to dithers.' The Du. schetteren, to laugh loud, to make a rattling noise (schetteringlie, sonus vibrans, fragor, sonus fragosus, modulatio—Kil.), is identical with E. shatter, scatter. The Sp. quebrar, to break (Port. quebro, a shake or quaver of the voice), corresponds to E. quiver, Lat. vibrare, Bav. fibern, fippern, to shake, tremble. The E. titter, representing the broken sound of suppressed laughter, leads through the G. zittern, to tremble, to E. tatter, a fragment. In like manner the Swiss fitzern, to titter, seems related to E. fitter, fatter, Swiss fatzete, gefätz, tatters, verfätzen, to tear to bits, wear to tatters. See Flinders.
To Fix. I. Lat. figere, fixum, to stick in, fasten, make firm.
To Fix. 2. In the American sense, to arrange. 'To fix the hair, the table, the fire, means to dress the hair, lay the table, and make the fire.'—Lyell. Probably a remnant of the old Dutch colonisation. Du. fiks, fix, reglé, comme il faut.—Halma. Een fix snaphaan, a gun which carries true; zyn tuigje fix houden, to keep oneself in good order. Pl.D. fix, quick, ready, smart; fix un fardig, quite ready; een fixen junge, a smart youth. Perhaps from fluks, ready, by the loss of the l, as fittich for flittich, a wing.
Five.—Fifteen.—Fifty. Sanscr. panch, Pol. piec, Boh. pet, Gr. πέντε, πέμπε, W. pimp, Goth. fimf, ON. fimm, G. fünf, Du. vyf, Lith. penki, Lat. quinque, Gael. coig, five.
To Fizz. See Fuzz.
Flabby.—Flap. The sound produced by the flapping of a loose broad surface is represented by the syllable flab, flap, flag, flack, flad, flat, varying, as usual in like cases, with the vowels u and i. Du. flabberen, fladderen, to flap, flutter—Weiland; Pl.D. fladdrig, flaggy, fluttering; Du. flaggeren, to flag, or hang loose—Kil.; G. fladdern, flattern, flackern, to flap, flutter, flicker. From the first of the foregoing forms is E. flabby, of such a nature as to give the sound flab, soft and limber, hanging loose; Du. flabbe, a slap, a fly-flap, the flap of a wound; Pl.D. flabbe, a hanging lip. In like manner from the second form, a flap is any broad thin body hanging by one side so as to be able to give a blow with the flat surface, or a blow of such a nature. Then, as a loose, flapping condition is a sign of a want of elasticity, or of a faded condition in vegetable or animal structures, Fr. dial. flappe, faded, soft, rotten; une poire flappe.—Gl. Génév. v. Flappi et terni, faded and tarnished.—c. nouv. nouv. It. flappo, flappy, withered.—Fl. Flack. — Flaccid. — Flicker. The third and fourth of the forms mentioned in the preceding article give rise to a wide range of derivatives. Fr. flac, onomatopée d'un coup qu'on donne sur un corps retentissant—Hécart; a slat, flap, stamp, or clap, given by a thing that is thrown against a wall or unto the ground, and the report made by hands struck one against the other; flacquer, to make a thing to flap or clap by casting it violently against the ground.—Cot. Flack, a blow, especially with something loose and pliant.—Forby. To flack, to hang loose, to palpitate.
Her cold breste began to heat, Her herte also to flacke and beat.—Gower. G. flacken, to move to and fro, to flicker. To flacker, to flutter, quiver; to flacket, to flap about, to flicker, fligger, to flutter.—Hal.
Then signifying the quality of things which flap, Fr. flaque, flache, Bret. flak, It. flacco, weak, flaggy, drooping, faint; Lat. flaccere, to be flaggy, flaccid, limber. From other modifications of the same radical image we have E. slack, Lat. laxus (= lak-s-us), loose, and with the nasal, languere, to flag, to be faint. wavy motion of flame or of a brandished sword. Dan. flagre, to wave to and fro as flame; Sp. flañear (of sails), to shiver in the wind; Fr. flambe, iris, water-flags; flamberge, a sword. The name of flammula is given to a ranunculus with spear or sword-shaped leaves. Fr. flammule, spear-wort, or spear crowfoot.—Cot. ON. flag-briosk (briosk, gristle), cartilage ensiformis. In the dialect of Carinthia flegge is a lath.—Deutsch. Mundart. 2. 339.
Flag. 3.—Flaw.—Flake. The syllable flag- is used to represent other sudden noises, as a squall, blast of wind, or wind and rain, a flash of lightning; flaw, a blast of wind, sudden flash of fire, storm of snow.—Jam. Sw. flaga, vindflaga, a flaw of wind.—Wideg. Du. vlaege, a squall.—Kil. N. flaga, to come in flaws or by fits; flaga, a blast of wind, a paroxysm, a fit or sudden attack. Comp. Guernsey flas, gust of wind, noise of a tree or wall falling.
Again, applied to the sound of cracking or splitting, we have Sw. flaga, a crack, breach, flaw; flaga sig, to scale off, fly off in scales; flaga (as Fr. éclat, a splinter, from éclater, to crack), what separates in such a manner, the dross of iron driven off under the hammer, a flake of snow (provincially also called flag—Hal.), the crust of a wound; flagna af, to separate in scales, to flake off. Hence must be explained Dan. dial. flag, flav, E. flag, a turf or sod peeled off from the surface of the ground; ON. flaga, to cut turfs, and as a noun, a sod, chips, splinters. A flagstone is one that separates in layers or flakes. So Dan. flise, to splinter, and as a noun, a flaw, a flagstone, ON. flis, a flake, a splinter, Sw. sno-flisa, a snow-flake.

Flag. 1. It has been shown under Flabby that flag is one of the forms by which we represent the sound of a cloth flapping. Hence a flag is a portion of cloth fastened by one edge to a staff in order that it may be conspicuous as an ensign floating in the wind. Then, as Lat. flaccere, to flag, to fall together, to droop, to become faint.
Flag. 2. The name of flag, Dan. flag, is given to several sorts of marsh and water plants with simple sword-shaped leaves. As the leaves are strong enough to stand upright of themselves it cannot be from the notion of drooping. In most European languages the name is taken from a sword, G. schwertel, Sp. espadana, Lat. gladiolus, whence Fr. glaieul (also called couteau des moissons), corn-flag, sword-grass.—Cot. There can be little doubt that the name of flag also is intended to mark the sword or flame-shaped figure of the leaves, probably from the
Flageolet. — Flute. OFr. flagoler, flageoler, to pipe.
J'oi Robin flagoler Au flagol d'argent.—Rayn.
Prov. Flagel, flageol, flagos, a pipe, and from the same verb Fr. flagorner, flûter aux oreilles, to pipe into one's ears, to blab, tell tales, flatter. Lang. flaguta, to pipe, and flaguto (Dict. Castr.), OFr. flahute, flaute, Fr. flûte, a flute. Fluber, to whistle, flubet, flute, whistle.—Vocab. de Berri. Ptg. fraguta, a shepherd's pipe.
Flagitious. Lat. flagitium, a vile action.
Flagon.—Flask. Fr. flacon, flascon, flasque, a great leathern bottle.—Cot. Perhaps from flagoter, to sound like liquid in a partly empty bottle.—Vocab. de Berri. Flacket, flaget, a bottle, flask, flagon.—Hal. Comp. Swiss gungeln, to guggle, gunke, a flask.
Flagrant. Burning, blazing, and thence conspicuous, signal. Lat. flagrare, to blaze, flame, originally doubtless as Dan. flagre, to flicker, flutter, flare, to flag, or wave to and fro. Bayr. flaugezen, to flicker, to blaze ; Du. vlaecken, to vi-brate as flame, to blaze, to glitter.—Kil. Gr. φλόξ, φλογός, flame, φλέγω, to burn. See Flame.
Flail. G. flegel, dresch-flegel; Fr. flayau, fliau (for flayel), a flail, a scourge. See Flog.
Flake. See Flag 3.
Flam. See Flim-flam.
Flame.—The Fr. flamber, to blaze, is to be looked on as showing the origin of Lat. flamma, rather than as a derivative from that word. The most obvious source whence the designation of flame could be taken is the fluttering sound by which it is accompanied, and on this principle we have accounted under Fla-grant for Lat. flagrare, and Gr. φλέγειν. In like manner we have Swiss fladern, to blaze, fladdern, to flutter ; Bohem. plapo-lati, to flutter, blaze, burn, plapol, flame ; plati, to flicker, flare, plamen, flame. The Fr. flamber is a nasalised form of the root flab in Du. flabberen, to flutter, and the original sense is preserved in Sp. flamear (of sails), to shiver, flutter, and in the corresponding OE. form as used by Barbour.
Baneris rycht fairly flawmand And penselys to the wind wawand.
The Fr. flamme is a streamer as well as a flame.
Flanch.—Flange. A flanch or flange is a turned-up border of a plate of iron or the like. The fundamental sense is pro-bably a flap. G. flatsche, flantsche, a piece, slice.—Sanders. Sc. flatch, to lay over, to turn down.—Jam.
Flank. It. fianco, Fr. flanc, the part of the body from the ribs to the hips, a part usually named from the absence of bone, by which it is characterised ; G. die weiche, from weich, soft ; Bohem. slabina, from slaby, soft, weak ; E. dial. lesk, from Fr. lasche, Bret. laosk, soft, flaggy. Flank or lesk, ilium, inguen.—Pr. Pm. On the same principle it would seem that flank is a nasalised form of Bret. flak, It fiacco, flaggy.
Flannel. Formerly written flannen, as it still is provincially. Feletin, flannen.—Cot. It is originally a Welsh manu-facture, and is in all probability from W. gwlanen, wool.
Flap. A representation of the sound of a blow with a limber, flat surface. Then applied to actions or objects adapted to make such a sound. See Flabby.
To Flare. To blaze with a flickering flame. Dan. flagre, G. flackern, to flicker, flutter, flack, flare. See Flagrant.
Flash. A representation of the sound made by a dash of water or sudden burst of flame. Swiss flätschen, to splash, flätzgen, to blaze. A flash is a rush of water from the locks on the Thames to assist the barges in their descent.—Grose.
A shallow temporary pool of water is called a flash or a plash. So from Fr. flaquer, to dash down water, flaque, a small shallow pool.—Gattel.
Flat. The train of thought to which this word owes its origin is the dashing down of something soft, the sound of which is represented by the syllables flac, flat. Fr. flac, a slat, flap, slamp, or clap given by a thing thrown violently on to the ground. Il vous la flacca là, he squasht, slat, or squat her down there.—Cot. The term is then applied to the object thrown down ; Du. vlecke, placke, plecke, a blot or drop of ink, or the like. Thence, as moist things flung down on the ground tend to spread out in width and lie close, we pass to the sense of flat-ness ; Du. vlack, G. flach, flat, plane, close to the ground. So from Pol. plask! representing the sound of dashing on the ground, plaski, flat.
The same train of thought is repeated with the root flat, plat, vlat. To flatten, to slap.—Hal. OE. to flat, to dash down water, &c. And right with that he swowned. Till Vigilate the veille Fette water at his eighen And flatte it on his face.—P. P.
Fr. flatir, faire flat, to spill water.—Pat. de Champ. Dan. dial. blatte, to fall down ; blat, a small portion of fluid, a blot. Fr. se blottir, to squat, or lie close to the ground ; Dan. plet, a blot or spot ; plat. It. piatto, Fr. plat, flat.
To tell a thing flatly is to blurt it out at once with a flop, like a wet lump thrown down on the ground before one. Dan. plat, flatly, bluntly, entirely.
To Flatter. The wagging of a dog's tail is a natural image of the act of flat-tering or fawning on one. Thus we have Dan. logre, to wag the tail ; logre for een, to fawn on one ; G. wedeln, to wag the tail, and E. wheedle, to gain one's end by flattery. ON. flaðra signifies both to wag the tail and to flatter. G. fladdern, flattern, to flutter, Swiss flädelen, to flatter; Du. vledderen, fledderen, to flutter, flap the wings; fletteren, fletten, to flatter; vleyd-steerten, to wag the tail, vleyden, to flatter. The Fr. flatter seems to come from a different source, having originally signified to lick, whence we readily pass to the idea of stroking an animal on the one hand or of flattery on the other. Ore donez le chael à flater [to lapyn] Qy leche la rosée [licket the dew] de le herber, give the puppy (water) to lap.—Bibels-worth, in Nat. Antiq. 153. Sp. flotar, to stroke or rub gently, Fr. flatter, to pat, stroke, caress, flatter. Flatter un cheval, un chien avec la main, to pat a horse or dog. Bret. floda, to caress, cajole. Compare Sicilian liccári, to lick, to flatter—Biundi; Prov. lepar, to lap, lick, flatter.

Flaunt. Properly to wave to and fro in the wind, then to move about in fine clothes, to let them be seen like a banner flaunting in the wind. Bav. flandern, fländern, to move about, wave to and fro. Swab. flandern, to flutter, fläntern, to sparkle, glitter. Swiss flanter-tuch, a flag. Henneberg flennern, to glitter, shimmer; flinnerle, spangles; fländerle, a showy flimsy garment. A nasalised form of fladdern, flattern, to flutter.

Flavour. From Fr. flairer, to smell, vent, wind, also to breathe out a scent, yield a savour (Cot.), we had formerly fleur, fleoure, flaware, a strong smell, especially a disagreeable one. With sa corrupit fleure nane mycht byde nere. D. V. 75. 18.—tetrum inter odorem. Ane stynkand fleware thrawis up in the are. 207. 38.—Sævamque exhalat opaca mephitim. The word is by some derived from Lat. fragrare, but the word can hardly be radically distinct from W. ffleirio, to feist, to make a stink (Lewis); Bret. fleria, to stink. Cat. flayre, odour. See Fleer.

Flaw. See Flag. 3.

Flawn. G. fladen, any cake that is thin and broad.—Küttn. Fr. flan, a cus-tard, or egg-pie. Du. vlaede, vlaeye, a custard, pancake. The origin of the word seems to be the sound made by the fall of something soft, represented by the syllable flad, or blad. Sc. flad, to slap, strike with something soft; a blad of weet, a heavy fall of rain; Sw. ko-bladde, Dan. dial. ko-blat, G. kuhfladen, a cow-dung. See Flat.

Flax. AS. fleax, Du. vlas, vlasch, Bohem. wlakno, unspun flax or hemp, fibres, flock; wlas, Russ. wolos', Lith. plaukas, hair. Compare Dan. hør, Austrian haar, flax, with E. hair. As parallel forms with an initial f and fl are very common, it is probable that AS. feax, the hair, is radically identical. The fur of a hare is called flix.

Flay. The origin of flag in the sense of a thin layer separating from the surface of the ground or other body has been above explained. Sw. flagna af, to separate in scales or flakes; ON. flaga, to cut thin turfs. The OS. flá, flegid, Du. vlaegen, vlaen, to flay, is a modification of the same root applied to stripping off the skin of an animal.

Flea. G. floh.

Fleak.—Flaik. Fleyke or hyrdylle, plecta, flecta, cratis.—Pr. Pm. Du. vlaek, a hurdle; G. flechte, a tress, braid, hurdle, basket; flechten, Dan. flette, to braid, plait, wattle; Lat. plectere, plexus, to braid; Gr. πλόκος, a lock, and thence πλέκω, to knit, plait, twine; πλέξανον, wicker or plaited work. ON. floki, a knot; flækja, to entangle; N. flokje, a knot, entangled lock of hair, twine, or the like.

* Fleam. Mid.Lat. flebotomum, fleotonium, flebum, fletum, MHG. vliedeme, G. fliede, fliete, Du. vlieme, Fr. flamme, flammette, a lancet. Gr. φλέψ, φλεβός, a vein, and τόμος, cutting. Du. vlieme is applied to sharp-pointed things, as the spine of a fish, the beard of corn. Bret. fleimn is the sting of a bee, or tooth of a serpent; flemma, to prick, to incite, stimulate.

Fleck, ON. fleckr, Du. vlecke, placke; G. fleck, flecker, a spot, blot, stain. All from the sound made by throwing on the ground a portion of something wet, represented by the syllables flak, flat, blat, plat. Fin. plätti, a blot, also the dull sound of a blow, sclopus surdus, ictus levior. See Flat.

-fleet, -flex. Lat. flecto, flexum, to bend or crook. A parallel form with plico, plecto, Gr. πλέκω, to fold, twine. The radical image is probably a short quick movement, as shown under Flinch.

Fledge. Sw. flygfärdig, ON. fleygr, G. flück, flügge, feathered, ready to fly, from fliegen, to fly. Flygge as bryddys, maturus, volatilis.—Pr. Pm.

To Flee. Supplanted in modern E. by fly in the present, though the preterite fled has held its ground. Goth. thliukan, AS. fleon, flion, G. fliehen. The Lat.

fugere, to flee, seems to point to a stage at which the senses of flee and fly, G. fliehen and fliegen, were expressed by a single verb formed from the root flug, from whence fugere was derived by the very common loss of the l; compare AS. flugol, fugol, fowl; G. flittich and fliich, wing.
From the present verb are formed AS. fleam, flight, exile, flyma, an exile, E. fleme, to drive out.
* Fleece. AS. fleos, flys, Pl.D. fliis, Du. vlies, the coat of wool off a sheep's back. Pl.D. fliisen, to pluck or shear the wool. Flokken und fliisen, to take the profits of a property. The radical sense seems to be what is splintered or stripped off from the surface. ON. flis, flosa, a splinter, thin slice; flysja, to split off; N. flis, splinter, shaving, scale; flus, flos, flys, scale, thin fragment, scurf, peel; flysja, to peel, pick. Sw. dial. flisa, to scale, shell, splinter; flas, peeling of potatoes or turnips, scurf, scab, ironslag; flasa, to peel potatoes. Du. vlies is not only the pelt of sheep or skin with the wool, or the woolly coat itself, but a membrane or pellicle, the skin of milk; vliesen de schaepen, to shear sheep.—Kil. See Flizz.
To Fleech. To supplicate in a flattering manner, to wheedle.—Hal. Pl.D. flook, an oath, a curse, floken, to adjure by an oath. G. fluch, a curse, flehen, to beseech.
To Fleer. To cast a disdainful or saucy look.—B. Sc. to fleyr, to distort the countenance, make wry faces, to whimper.—Jam. Dan. dial. flire, to laugh at one, to sneer; Norse flira, to titter, laugh out of season, flir, suppressed laughter.
The two false ones with grete gre Stode and bihelde her riche atyr And beganne to lagh and flerye. Florence of Rome, Ritson, 2. 75.
We should have no hesitation in considering it as a contraction of fligger or flicker, to laugh scornfully or wantonly—B., were it not for parallel forms with an n instead of an r. Sw. flina, to show the teeth, sneer; Dan. dial. fline, to wry the mouth, smile, sneer; Swab. flannen, flennen, as well as flarren, to cry. Norse flina, as well as flira, to titter; Bav. flenschen, to wry the mouth, either in crying or derisive laughter.
But probably as we have snigger as well as sneer, fligger as well as fleer, all these forms are imitations of the inarticulate sounds made in tittering, sneering, or whimpering.
That they must fligger, scoff, deride, and jeer. Nares.
Prov. flairar, to smell, properly to draw up air through the nose, to snift.
La mesquina flaira e grina, the unhappy snifts and groans.—Rayn.
Dan. fniese, to titter, giggle; fnyse, to snort. Sw. dial. flisa, flissa, to smile.
The meanings of fleet are very numerous, but they may probably all be derived from the notion of flowing water. OHG. fliozan, G. fliessen, ON. eg flyt, flaut, hefi flotid, at fliota, to flow; Sw. flyta, Dan. flyde, to flow, and also to float; flyta med strömen, to swim with the stream; gulvet flyder med vand, the floor swims with water. AS. fleotan, fluctuare; Sc. to fleit, flete, to flow, to float, and figuratively to abound.—Jam. Naviger, to sail, to fleete.—Hollyband.
The same form appears as a noun in ON. fliot, a river; E. fleet, a creek up which the tide flows.
In a figurative sense to fleet is to flow away, to escape, move rapidly away, whence the notion of transitory, swift, rapid.
Now at the last that fleit us evermore The forthir coist of Italie have we caucht. D. V. 164. 30.
The participial fleeting in the sense of what passes quickly away is very common. It. flusso, transitory, fleeting—Fl.; ON. fliotr, fliotlegr, E. fleet, swift.
The original image is the flapping movement of a resonant body, the representation of which is made to express also the wavering of a fluid surface. Pl.D. flittern, fluddern, to flap, flutter, flicker; Bav. flodern, to flutter, flicker; fludern, to flap, flutter, to make to flow, to float wood; Du. fledderen, to flap the wings; flodderen, to flap as loose clothes; Wallach. fluturà, to flutter as a butterfly or flake of snow. E. flutter was formerly applied to the wavering movement of a floating body.
Thus in the Schippe alone left he Floteringe amyddes the hye sea. St Graal, c. 24. 174, Roxburghe Club.
From the frequentative form in which the word seems earliest to have appeared was formed a root flot, flod, flud, signifying undulating movement. G. pluderhosen, wide flapping breeches; Lith. pludurauti, to swim here and there, to drift; pludas, what swims on the surface, flowing; pludis, a raft; pluditi, plusti, to float. Fr. à flot, floating, borne up and down by the waves; flot, a wave, the flow of the tide ; flatter, to float; ON. flot, the act of floating or swimming, and thence the grease swimming on the surface of broth or the like ; Pl.D. flot, cream, bringing us to E. fleet, to skim the cream from the surface of milk.
The AS. flota, a ship, Pl.D. flote, a raft, is essentially the same word with ON. floti, Dan. flaade, Fr. flotte, a fleet.
From the form of the root ending in a d instead of t we have Goth. flodus, ON. flód, Sw. flod, E. flood, a flowing water, river, inundation, tide, and thence ON. flœda, Sw. floda, to inundate.
The change of d into w gives AS. flo'wan, fleowan, and E. flow. Du. vloeden, vloeyen, Pl.D. flojen, to flow. With these latter forms may be classed Bohem. plowiti, to swim, Pol. plawić, to float, convey by water, to hover in the air ; Russ. plavat', to swim, sail, navigate ; splaviť, to float ; plavok, the float of a net ; Serv. plaviti, to overflow, to skim milk ; plaviti se, to swim, to float with the stream. Again, we have Russ. pluit', poplaviť, to swim, float, sail, flow ; pluitie, swimming. Thus we are brought to Lat. fluere, to flow, fluvius, a river, and Gr. πλέω, to fluctuate, sail, swim, navigate, πλοῖον, a ship.
Some of the derivatives of Lat. fluo, as the participle fluxus, and fluctus, wave, would indicate that the original root of the verb had a final k, instead of a t or d as in float, flood, but this is only another instance of that equivalence of labials, dentals, and gutturals in representing many kinds of natural sounds, already exemplified under Flabby, where it was shown that the roots flab, flag, flad, or flap, flack, flat, are used with apparent indifference in expressing a flapping, flickering, fluttering action.
Fleet. The sense of shallow is probably derived from the notion of swimming on the surface, skimming the surface. Shallow is what keeps near the surface. So we have Bohem. plauti, to swim, flow, float ; pluti, swimming, navigation ; Pol. płyt, a float or raft ; Bohem. Pol. płytki. shallow. Pl.D. flot, shallow.
On this supposition we must regard the resemblance to flat as accidental, though it must be confessed the words resemble each other both in sound and sense in a remarkable manner. Fr. plat and Fris. flaak signify both flat and shallow ; Du. vlack, flat, vlacke, a shallow estuary ; Sw. flata i sjön, a shallow in the sea.—Serenius.
Flesh. Du. vleesch, G. fleisch, AS. flæsc, flac. In the Scandinavian tongues flesk is used for bacon, though sometimes for flesh in general. Ihre regards flick as the primary form, signifying a piece or part separated. ON. flicki, a large piece of meat. A piece of bacon is sometimes called flyckis-sneid, and at others fleskys-sneid. The Sw. fläsk is used in the special sense of a flitch of bacon, i. e. the half-side of a hog. ON. flaska, to split. See Flitch.
Fletcher. A maker of arrows. Fr. flèche, Piedm. fleccia, It. freccia, frizza, Pl.D. flitz, an arrow. All from the whizzing sound of an arrow through the air, as arrow itself was shown to be derived from a similar representation. The Swiss flitschen expresses the noise which a switch or an arrow makes in cutting through the air ; G. flitzen, to move rapidly, to fly.—Sanders. See Flit. Fr. frissement d'un trait, the whizzing sound of a flying arrow.—Cot.
Flew. 1. Washy, tender, weak.—Hal. Du. flaauw, languid, spiritless ; G. flau, faint, flat, slack. From flab or flag, in the sense of hanging loose, failing in elasticity and vigour. The degradation of the radical sound is well exemplified in Fr. flebe, fleve, fleuve, flewe, weak.—Patois de Champagne.
2. Shallow. Flew or scholde, as vessel or other like, bassus.—Pr. Pm. This is only a secondary application of the notion of slackness. Slack water is when the water begins to sink, instead of flowing upwards, and of course becomes shallower. G. flau, shallow, flat, stale ; flau werden, to sink in estimation, abate, become flat. ON. flár, N. flaa, shallow, as a dish, wide and open, flat, as a valley with gently sloping sides.
Flew.—Flue. Down or nap ; little feathers or flocks which stick to clothes.—B. W. lluwch, motes, flying dust, spray, sand ; lluwchio, to blow about as dust, to drift. The radical image is of something that floats or flies in the air. AS. fleogan, Pl.D. flegen, to fly ; flog, flok, whatever is light and flies in the air, down ; flog-aske, light ashes ; flock-federn, down.—Br. Wtb. Lancash. flook, waste cotton. Sw. dial. flaga, to wave in the air ; Bav. flöden, flähen, flöwen, to move to and fro in water ; fläheln, flöheln, to move to and fro in the air ; fläen, flöwen, flage', flöiwm, flöm, chaff, flue ; G. flaum, down. The n changes to an n or is altogether lost in Dan. fnug, fug, the finest particles of wool, silk, down, which when separated float like dust in the air (Molbech); Sw. fnug, motes, down. Norse fok, drift, what is blown about by the air; snö-fok, sandfok, driving snow, sand; fjuka, to drive about with the wind; fjukr, flue, dust.

Flew-net. Du. flouw, vlouw, a net hung to poles to catch woodcocks, or the like.

Flews. The chops of a dog. Pl.D. flabbe, the chops, thick lips. De flabbe hangen laoten, to be chap-fallen.—Dan. Neil. The same change from a final b to w will be observed as above with respect to flew in the sense of weak. See Flabby.

Flick.—Flip. Forms representing the sound made by a jerk with a whip, the corner of a towel, or the like. Flick, a smart, stinging slap—Forby; a slight blow, especially with a whip; fip, a slight, sudden blow.—Hal. Hence Dan. flig, flip, the implement with which a blow of the foregoing description is given, the corner of a handkerchief, apron, &c.

To Flicker. To flutter, as a bird or flame; to fleer, or laugh wantonly or scornfully.—B. From a representation of the flapping or tittering sound. G. flackern, to flare, blaze, flutter. Du. flig-geren, to flutter; flikkeren, to twinkle, glitter.

-flict. See Fling.
Flight. See Fly.

Flimflam.—Flam. The radical no-tion is of something made to catch the eye with no substance beneath, mere show and glitter without solidity. G. flimmen, to gleam; flammern, flimmern, to glitter, sparkle, shine with trembling light; gold-flimmer, tinsel. A flam is a story without foundation cooked up to deceive or amuse, a falsehood. 'A parcel of groundless flams'—Warburton. Flimflams, trifles. 'Rewards too great for your flimflams'—Swift. G. flimmer is in like manner applied to something worthless. 'Was soll ich mit einem hohl-flimmer thun?'—Sanders.

* Flimsy. A flimflam is something showy and unsubstantial, but more probably the word may be formed by transposition of the l and m from E. dial. fliz-zom, properly signifying a peeling or thin skin, equivalent to Sw. dial. flasma, a scale or splinter, and, as a verb, to scale off. In Da. dial. flims, flems, skin of boiled milk, flimse, small bits of skin in milk, we have the same transposition as in E. flimsy. See Flizz.

To Flinch. To shrink from pain with a quick, convulsive movement. A nasalised form of flick, corresponding to G. flinken, to glitter, flink, smart, brisk; Du. flikkeren, flinkeren, to glitter, twinkle.—P. Marin. In the same manner Du. wicken, wincken, to vibrate, to wink; essentially the same word with wince or winch, to shrink from pain. Compare also twitch, a convulsive movement, with twinkle, to glitter, or wink the eyes. The frequentative flikkeren, flinkeren, represents in the first instance a crackling noise, then a glittering light, or vibratory movement. The fundamental syllable flick, flink, then becomes a root, with the sense of a sharp, rapid movement. We find in OE. flecche, without the na-sal, probably direct from Fr. fléchir, to bend, turn, or go awry, or on the one side.—Cot. He ihurde sigge wher cristene men in tourment were ibroht, To confortie hem he wende thider, that hi ne flecchede noht, Beoth hardi he seide and stedefast. St Christopher, Roxburghe Club.

Flinders.—Flitters. These differ only in the nasal pronunciation of the former. Flinders, pieces, fragments. Flitters, pieces, rags, also to scatter in pieces.—Hal. 'It flyiteryt al abrode.'—Morte d'Arthure. Du. flenters, tatters; Norse flindra, a shiver of stone, or the like; flindrast, to shiver, split to pieces.—Aasen. G. flitter, flinder, a spangle, glittering little plate of metal; flittern, to glitter, properly to quiver; whence (as we speak of shivering a thing to pieces, breaking it to shivers) the sense of fragments. Compare Du. schitteren, to glitter, with E. scatter; Fr. éclater, to glitter, with éclats, fragments. And see Fitters.

To Fling. From the root flag or flog, representing the sound of a blow, then applied to other kinds of sudden violent action, ON. fleygia, to cast, to fling; Sw. flenga med risom, to beat with rods; fläng, any violent action; flänga af, to snatch away, to make off, fling out of the house; rida i fläng, to ride full speed; flänga barken af träden, to strip bark off a tree; N. flengja, to tear to pieces, whence Sw. flinga, a fragment, bit, flake. Lat. infligere, to strike on, confligere, to strike together, belong to the same root.

Flint. G. flins, flintenstein, flint; fliese, flinse, a flagstone ; OberD. vlins, flint, pebble.—Adelung. Flints may be considered as splinters or shivers of stones, from ON. flis, E. flitter, flinder, a fragment. Da. flise, to split ; Sw. dial. flis, a splinter, fragment, little bit ; flis, flissten, a pebble. Or possibly the name may be taken from their having formerly been used as spear or arrow-heads. Fris. flen-stien, flan-stien, flint, from ON. fleinn, AS. flán, an arrow, dart.

Flip.—Flippant. Flip, like flick, re-presents a smart blow with something thin and flexible. Hence flippant, nim-ble-tongued, jocund, brisk, airy.—B. It now implies over-smartness, sauciness, as Pl.D. flügg, lively, spirited beyond what is becoming.—Danneil. Flip, nimble, flippant.—Hal. ON. fleipr, tat-tle ; fleipinn, flippant, pert, petulant ; fleipni, precipitantia linguæ, readiness of tongue ; flapra, to speak inconsiderately ; fleppinn, precipitate, thoughtless.

Flirt.—Flurt. 1. Used in the same sense as blurt to represent a pop with the mouth, and thence a gesture of con-tempt or mockery. It. strombettare, to blurt with one's mouth ; strombezzare, to hiss, or flurt at in scorn and reproach. —Fl.

I am ashamed, I am scorned, I am flurted. B. & F. in R.

2. It also represents the noise made by a jerk with a light implement. To flirt a fan, to open and shut it with a jerk. Fr. nasarde, a fillip, rap, or flirt on the nose.—Cot. The same meanings are also combined in It. chicchera, a flurt with one's finger, or a blurt with one's mouth in scorn.—Fl.

To flirt is figuratively applied to lively conversation between the sexes, and the term is used as a disparaging appellation of a young girl. In like manner Bav. flitschen, to flap, flutter ; flitschen, a young girl ; w. ffrit, a sudden start or jerk ; ffritten, a flighty female, a little girl. In Du. vlerken, to flutter, flap the wings, the final t is exchanged for a k, and the same change is found pro-vincially in E. To flirk, to jerk or flip about.—Hal. We have flick (g. ficken) and flick, flirk and flirk, flisk and flisk, all used very much in the same sense. So Swiss flitschen, Bav. flitschen, to move to and fro ; G. flittich, and flittich, a wing.

To Flisk. To flick with a whip, to skip or bounce.—Hal. Flick, flisk, flick, flisk, all represent the sound of a cut with a switch or the like, then rapid movement to and fro.

To Flit. To remove from place to place.—B. Dan. flytte, to remove. Swiss flitschen, to switch, representing the sound made by a rod cutting through the air. Pl.D. flitzen, flitschen, to move rapidly. Dáo flitzt he hen, there he flies by.—Danneil. Bav. fletzen, to change one's abode.

In the same way without the l, Swiss fitzen, to switch, flitschen, to move about, to fidge.

Flitch. Suffolk flick, the outer fat of the hog cured for bacon, while the rest of the carcase is called the bones.—Forby. Fr. fliche, flique de lard, a flitch of bacon. ON. flicki, a large lump of flesh. Pl.D. flick, flicken, a piece, as of cloth or land.—Danneil. A flick or fleach is also in the East of England a portion of sawn plank or timber. Sw. fläcka, to split, to open ; fläckt örn, the imperial double-headed eagle ; Dan. flække, to split ; flæsk-sild, Pl.D. fläk-hering, or flik-hering, a split herring ; gose-fläk, or flik-gos, half a dried goose. So a flitch of bacon is half of the split carcase with the limbs removed. See Flag.

* To Flite. AS. flitan, to scold, to quarrel. OHG. flizan, contendere, cer-tare, intendere, operam dare, festinare, conari ; fliz (G. fleisz, Du. vliet, dili-gence), opera, nisus, studium, contentio, dissensio. Fleiz si thar des rehtes, stu-duit ibi justitiæ. Fleiz in gegini, con-tendebant in concursum.—Otfr. Der Uuiderfliez, the adversary, the devil.

The word originates (as pointed out by Adelung) in the notion of fleetness or rapidity, ON. fljótr, fleet, quick, ready, willing ; fljótvirkr, quick or diligent in action ; flyta, to hurry on, to hasten.

To Flizz. To fly off; flizzing, a splinter.—B. Flizzoms, flying particles, or very small flakes in bottled liquors.—Forby. N. flus, small fragments of very thin things, as of dry leaves or skin, chaff of corn, dust of tobacco ; flysja, to peel.—Aasen. Sw. flisa, a shiver, scale, fragment ; snö flisa, a snow-flake ; flisig, scaly ; flisa, Dan. flise, to splinter. Sw. dial. flas, thin skin, peeling, scurf; flasa, to peel, to scale ; flasma, a splinter ; Da. dial. flems, flims, skin of milk. ON. flasa (pl. flosur), notch.

Float.—Flood. See Fleet.

Flock.—Flocculent. Lat. floccus, It. flocco, Fr. floc, a lock or flock of wool, flake of snow, &c. The word is also common to all the Teutonic stock. Norse flokk, a heap, collection, family; flokje, knot, bunch.—Aasen. The primitive meaning of the word seems to be a co-herent mass. Gael. ploc, strike, beat, and as a substantive, any round mass, a clod, club, head of a pin; pluc, beat, thump, and substantively a knot, lump, bunch. Russ. puk', a bunch, or tuft. Bohem. pluk, Pol. pulk, Russ. polk, a regiment of soldiers. Lith. pulkas, a flock, crowd, herd, usually of men or animals. Russ. klok', a bunch, tuft, flock. Fr. folc, fulc, foulc, fouc, a flock or herd. When applied to a number of birds the word is confounded with AS. floc, a flight. Perhaps, too, in a flock of snow it may be difficult to say whether the idea is taken from its light, flying nature, or from cohering in a mass. Pl.D. flog-aske, light ashes; flock-federn, down.

To Flog. From the sound of a blow, represented by the syllable flag, flak, Lat. flagrum, flagellum, a scourge; in-fligere, confligere, to strike one thing against another. Bohem. flakati, to flog. Pl.D. flogger, a flail. See Flack, Flag.

Flood. See Fleet.

Flook. G. fluhen, anker-fliegen,—flunken, the flooks of an anchor; from MHG. vluc, Bav. flüg, Pl.D. flüke, a wing. So Sw. flik, Dan. flig, a flap, lappet; ankerflig, the flook of an anchor. The ultimate origin is the same in both cases, as the designation of the wing, as well as lappet, is taken from the idea of fluttering or flipping. Pl.D. flukkern, flunkern, to flicker, sparkle.

Floor. AS. flor, Du. vloere, floor; G. flur, a tract of flat country, floor. W. llawr, the ground, the floor of a house or barn. Nef a llawr, heaven and earth. I lawr, down, downwards. Gael. làr, the ground, earth-floor, ground-floor; làrach, site, habitation, farm. Lat. lar, a hearth, dwelling, home; Lares, the tutelar deities of a dwelling.

Floral.—Florid.—Florist. Lat. flos, floris, a flower.

Floss-silk. It. floscio, Venet. flosso, Piedm. flos, faint, drooping, flaccid; floscia-seta, floss-silk, sleeve or ravel silk. Walach. fleciu, soft; flesceritu, flaggy, faded. Fr. flosche, flaggy, weak, soft, as a boneless lump of flesh. Bav. floss, loose, not fast; floss-stricken, to knit loose.

The origin of a root flak, signifying weak, limber, has been explained under Flag. This is softened down in the Fr. flache, flasche, It. floscio, flosso; while FLUE from the original form we have Rouchi flague, weak, and G. flock-seide. The two forms appear in close proximity in the south of France. Limousin fla, fem. flaquò, weak; Languedoc fla, fem. flosso, soft, untwisted silk.

Flounce. The plaited hanging border with which a gown is ornamented, originally a pleat or tuck, from Fr. fronce, a plait, gather, wrinkle, Du. fronsse, a wrinkle, by the very common change between fl and fr. So It. fronda, Langued. flonda, a sling; G. flecken, E. freckle; frock, and flock, &c. See Frounce.

To Flounce. To jump in, or roll about in the water, to be in a toss, or fume, with anger.—B. The essential meaning is the same with that of the N. flunsa, to do anything with noise and bluster, like one dashing about in water. Sw. dial. flunsa, to plunge in water, to splash, to tramp through wet. Du. plonssen, to plunge, plansen, blansen, to dash down water; neer flansen, to dash down; flansen, to do a thing in a hasty, careless way.—Weiland.

Flounder. A flat fish. ON. flydra, Sw. flundra.

To Flounder. A nasalised form of Du. flodderen, to make a flapping or fluttering motion, as loose garments; flodder-koussen, one with loose trowsers; then from the splashing sound applied to motion in water. Door 't water, door de slik flodderen, to struggle through wet and dirt. Langued. floundijha, to fling about the legs like an infant.

Flour.—Flower. The finest part of meal. Fr. fleur de farine, literally flower or blossom of meal. The name of flowers was given in chemistry to the fine mealy matter which in sublimation is carried to the head of the still, and adheres in the form of a fine powder.—B. In this sense we speak of flowers of sulphur.

To Flout. To jeer, properly to blurt, or make an offensive noise with the mouth. Du. fluyte, popysmus; fluyten, popysmo et vocis blandimento demulcere equum.—Kil. To flurt or blurt with the mouth are also used in the sense of jeering. Da. dial. flous, gibe, sarcasm.

To Flow. See Fleet.

Flower.—Flourish. Fr. fleur, Lat. flos, floris, a flower, floreo, to bear flowers.

Fluctuate. Lat. fluctus, a wave or billow, fluo, fluctuo, to flow as water does.

Flu.—Fluent.—Fluid. Lat. fluo, to flow.

Flue. See Flew.

Flue of a chimney. A small winding chimney of a furnace carried up into the main chimney.—B. Now applied to the chimney-shaft in general. Used by Phaer for the winding hollow of a shell. Him Tryton cumbrous bare, that galeon blew with whelkfed shell, Whose wrinkly wreathed fas did fearful shrill in seas outyell.

Fluff.—Fluffy. Fluff, Da. fnug, fug, down, flue, light dust, feathery particles that are borne about in the air. The radical sense seems to be to blow, expressed by a slight modification of E. fuff, to puff or blow, the addition or omission of a liquid in these imitative forms being very common, as in Da. fnug, fug, above mentioned, or in AS. flugol, a fugitive, a bird, compared with fugol, fugel, a bird. To faff or fuff, to blow in puffs.—Atkin-son. Faffle, to flap gently as a sail or garment stirred by a momentary breath of air; a wavering blowing of a light wind.—Whitby Gloss. Sylvester uses flaff in the same sense : ' a thousand flaffing flags.' See Flew.

Flume. A stream of water, now appropriated to a stream carried in an artificial channel, a boarded aqueduct. 'The flum Jordan.'—Wicliff. OFr. flum, flume, flujis.—Roquef. ' Le flum Jurdan.'—Livre des Rois. Prov. flum, Lat. flumen, river, from fluere, to flow. Norse flom, flaum, a flood, overflow of water from the melting of snows; flauma, to flow in abundance, overflow. Flom-sav, a water saw-mill; Dan. flom, a morass, overflowed land.

Flummery. W. Llymry, an acid preparation from the husks and fragments of oats, from llym, sharp. It is the same as the Sc. sour sowens.

Flunkey. An opprobrious name for a livery-servant. Pl.D. flunkern, to be gaudily dressed; Du. flonkeren, flinkeren, to glitter; G. flunke, a spark.

Flush. I. To flush a water-course is to send a sudden flow of water down it, from the sound of the rush of water, as flash, above cited in the same sense. E. dial. flosh-hole, the hole that receives the waste water from a mill; to floss, to spill, to splash. Sc. flusch, a run of water, the overflowing of a stream, abundance; flouss, a flood, a stream.—Jam. Du. fluysen, Dan. dial. fluse, to flow with violence, to rush; ad fluse ud sem vandet af en flddgyde, to gush out as water from a flood-gate. N. flust, abundantly; flus, liberal, open-handed, as we speak of being flush of money.

FLY A person looks flushed when he has a flow of blood to the face, and figuratively flushed with victory is animated by it, excited, as if by an increased flow of vital fluids. A flush at cards. It. flusso, Fr. flux, Du. fluys, is a run or flow of cards of the same suit.

2. A number, as a flush of wild ducks. Pl.D. flusch, a bunch of hair, wool, or the like.—Danneil.

3. Immediate, instant. Now the time is flush.—Timon of Athens. Sw. fluks, flux, quickly, anon; Du. flus, presently, in a short time; fluks, G. flugs, quickly, immediately, in an instant; from flug, flight.

4. Flush in the sense of level, on a line with, may probably be explained by Da. flugt, flight, which is used to express an unbroken line. ' At opfore en bygning i lige flugt med andre huse:' to raise a building in the same line with or flush with the other houses. ' Planke i flugt med den overste kant af væggen :' planks on a level with the upper edge of the wall. A vessel is flush fore and aft when the deck is level from stem to stern.

Fluster. Closely allied with bluster; hurried, bustling, or swaggering conduct. 'The fluster of the bottle,' 'the flustering vain-glorious Greeks.' ON. flaustr, precipitancy, over-haste. Walach. flustura, to raise a wind, to do anything in a turbulent manner, tumultuor, ventose ago; flusturatu, ventosus, vanus, levis; windy, turbulent, boisterous.

Flute. See Flageolet. A fluted column is one channelled, as if with pipes. Mod.Gr. αυλός, a flute, αύλάκι, a channel, canal, fluting of a column.

To Flutter. Pl.D. fluttern, fluddern, G. flattern, to make a flapping, to flutter, flicker; Du. fledderen, to flap the wings, flodderen, to flap, as loose clothes; Walach. flutura, to flutter, fly about; fluturi, a butterfly, a flake of snow. A direct representation of a flapping noise.

Flux.—Fluxion. Lat. fluo, fluxum, and fluctum, to flow.

Fly. AS. fleoga, ON. fluga, Du. vlieghe, a flying insect.

* To Fly. G. fliegen, Du. vliegen, ON. fliuga, AS. fleogan, Dan. flyve, to fly. The immediate origin seems ON. flug, AS. floe, Du. vleuge, vloge, flight, the act of flying, the most natural expression of which might be taken from regarding the flying object as blown along through the air. We should thus connect the root flug and the parallel form fug (shown in

AS. fugel, G. vogel, a fowl, and in Lat. fugio, to fly) with forms like Lat. flo, to blow, Bav. flaen, flawen, to move to and fro in water, flaen, flaheln, to float in air, to blow, E. fluff, down, light dust floating in the air, fuff, to blow, to puff.
Foal.—Filly. Goth. fúla, G. fohlen, fallen, It. fiuledro, Gr. πῶλος, W. ebol, a young horse. The diminutive form in Bav. fülchen, Da. dial. fyllie, E. filly, distinguishes the female. Puledra, fulihha.
—Gloss. in Schmeller.
Foam. AS. fám, G. faum. Perhaps a parallel form with G. flaum, signifying what is light enough to float on wind or water ; flaum-feder, down ; Bav. pflaum, down, loose foam, as of beer; Pl.D. flom, fat that rises to the surface in boiling meat. Comp. AS. flugol and fugol, fowl ; G. flittich and flittich, wing ; E. fluffy and 'fuffy, light, downy. Whitby flumpy, Da. dial. fompet, fat and short. See Flew. On the other hand foam is regarded as the equivalent of Sanscr. phena, Pol. piana, Boh. pena, foam.
Fob. Pruss. fuppe, a pocket.
To Fob. To fob off, to delude with a trick. To bob or pop were used in the same sense.
And do you pop me off with this slight answer?
Noble Gentleman, i. i.
Disgrace me on the open stage, and bob me off with ne'er a penny?—O. Play in Nares.
The fundamental sense is a smart, rapid movement. N. fubba, to move to and fro. G. foppen, to banter, jeer, or play upon one. In the same way bob was used in the sense of a taunt or scoff.
He, that a fool doth very wisely hit, Doth very foolishly (although he smart) Not to seem senseless of the bob.
As You Like It. You should not make a laughing-stock, good brother, Of one that wrongs you not; I do profess I won't be fubbed.—The Ordinary, iv. 4.
See Fop.
Fodder. — Forage. — Forray. AS. foder, Du. voeder, voeyer, G. futter, Swiss fur, fuhr, victuals, food. The Mid.Lat. foderum, fodrum, was especially applied to the demand of provisions for man and horse made under cover of prerogative or seignorial rights, or by an army in an enemy's country. Hence foderare, for-rare, OFr. fourrer, aller en fuerre, or enfourrage, to exact foder-age, to forage, or forray. ' Nec mansiones eorum hos-pitari vel invadere vel foderare praesumat.'—Bulla A.D. 1036. ' Campaniam ap-plicavit et eam totam foderavit,' laid it under exaction.—Chron. A.D. 1194. 'Qui-dam de Francis discurrebant emolumen-tis victualium intendentes quod vulgariter forrare dicitur.'—Matth. Paris, A.D. 1242, in Duc. Fr. fourrager, to fodder, also to forrage, prey, forray, ransack, ravage.—Cot. 'Nobis,' says Frederic I., A.D. 1183, 'intrantibus in Lombardiam fo-drum consuetum et regale—praestabunt.'—Muratori, Diss. 19.
Foe. AS. fah, fá, enemy. ON. fjá, to hate. See Fiend.
Fog. I. Dan. snefog, a snow-storm ; fyge, to drive with the wind ; Dan. dial. fuge, to rain fine and blow. ON. fok, snow-storm, flight of things driven by the wind ; fok-sandr, drift sand ; at fýkja, fyk, fokid, to drive with the wind. Pro-bably an l has been lost ; Pl.D. flok, flog, light things that rise and fly in the air; flog-aske, light flying ashes ; flock-federn, down. Sw. dial. flyka, to fly about as dust, to smoke, snow fine ; fnyk, dust. Dan. fnug, fug, flock, flue ; Lith. púkas, a flock as of ashes, or snow ; púkai (pl.), down-hair, down.
Fog. 2.—Feg. Grass not eaten down in the summer, that grows in tufts over the winter. Fogagium, winter pasture in the forests. In Cleveland a distinction is made between fog, aftermath, and feg, a dead grass stem, anything without worth or value.—Atkinson.
The thick and well grown fog doth mat my smoother shades.—Drayton.
Swiss fäsch, thick, tangled grass, such as is found here and there in the mountains and higher pastures ; fätsch, a mountain pasture mowed only every second year, reedy grass remaining uneaten by the cattle and then gathered.
To Fog. To make shift ; to resort to mean expedients.
Wer't not for us thou swad, quoth he, Where wouldst thou fog to get a fee.
Dryden in Nares.
To fudge, to contrive to do.—Hal. G. fug, convenience, opportunity. But see Pettifogger.
Foible. Fr. foible, faible, weak. See Feeble.
Foil. I. The blunted weapon used in fencing, or learning the sword exercise. The Fr. equivalent floret is explained by Cot. a sword with the edge rebated, where the term rebated answers to Fr. refoulé, dulled, blunted, the origin of E. foil.
2. A piece of gold or silver leaf set be-hind a transparent gem, in jewelry to give it colour or lustre, then, figuratively some-thing used for the purpose of showing advantageously another object. Fr. feu-ille, Lat. folia, leaf.
To Foil. Fr. fouler, to trample on, weigh down, oppress, foil, overcharge.—Cot. Fouler un cheval, to overtoil a horse, to knock him up. Refouler, to dull, blunt, foil, tire with overlabouring; affoler, to foil, bruise or hurt sore with wounds, to spoil, ruin, undo.—Cot. It. follata, Fr. foulée, the foiling or slot of a deer, the mark of his footsteps. To tread underfoot is taken as a type of the most complete overthrow and defeat.
To Foin. To make a pass or thrust at one in fencing.—B. The terms of fencing being taken mainly from the Fr., to foin is probably from OFr. foindre, foigner, to feign, or make a feint, i. e. a movement with the sword intended to deceive the opponent's eye in preparation for a thrust; whence the expression would easily be averted to the thrust itself.
Foison. The natural juice or moisture of the grass or herbs, the heart and strength of it.—B. ' There is no foison in this hay.'—Forby. Fissen-less, without strength or virtue. The proper meaning is abundance, Fr. foison, OFr. fuson, from Lat. fusio, pouring out. Senes sane fusion, without effusion of blood. ' Estoit deja si foible pour la foison du sang qu'il avoit perdu.'—Roman de Garin in Rayn. Pain e char e bon peisson Leur mit el nef a grunt fusan.—Haveloc, ib.
To Foist. To intrude, or put in fal-laciously, to introduce surreptitiously.—R. To foist, feist, fizzle, are all originally to break wind in a noiseless manner, and thus to foist is to introduce something the obnoxious effects of which are only learned by disagreeable experience. —Come Put not your foists upon me, I shall scent them. B. Jonson in R. G. fist, a foist, fist, fizzle.—Küttn. Du. veest, vijst, flatus ventris.—Kil. Fr. vesse, a fyste.—Cot. The origin is plainly an imitation of the noise. ON. fysa, to blow, to breathe, also to break wind. Gr. φύσαω, to blow.
Foisty, fusty, frousty, frowzy, having a close, disagreeable smell. Pl.D. fistrig, ill-smelling, as a peasant's room.—Danneil. Wall. s'efister, s'empuanter. See Fusty.
Fold. I. A plait in a garment. Goth. falthan, G. falten, AS. fealdan, Du. vouden, to lay together, to fold. In composition, Goth. ainfalths, managfalths, one-fold, manifold. Gael. fill, fold ; filleadh, a folding, wrapping, plaiting ; fillt, fillte, a fold, a ply ; filltich, multiply. W. ffill, a twist, a turn, ffilliad, a writhing, wreath-ing, or turning about.
2. A place to confine sheep, or other animals. AS. fald, Gael. fàl, a penfold, circle, wall, hedge, W. ffald, a sheep-cote, fold, pound for cattle.
Foliage. Fr. feuillage, from Lat. folium, Gr. φύλλον, a leaf.
Folio. A book is said to be in folio, in the sheet, when a sheet makes but two leaves without further folding ; in quarto, with an additional folding, which divides the sheet into four.
Folk. AS. folc, Lat. vulgus, people ; ON. fylki, or fulki, a troop, a district; fylkir, king. At fylkia lidi, to arrange one's men in troops. Pol. pulk, a regi-ment of soldiers. Helido folc, turba vi-rorum.—Heliand. See Flock.
To Follow. G. folgen, ON. fylgia, AS. fyligean, folgian.
Folly. See Fool.
To Foment. To cherish by warm ap-plications, metaphorically, to abet. Lat. fomentum, for fovimentum, a warm ap-plication, from foveo, to warm, to cherish.
Fond.—Fon. Foolish, then foolishly attached to one ; a very common se-quence of ideas. So we speak of doting on one. When age approcheth on. And lust is laid, and all the fire is queint. As freshly then thou shalt begin to fonne And dote in love.—Chaucer in R. Fr. sot, fol, foolish ; être assoté, affolé de, aimer passionnement, jusqu'à la folie (Patois de Flandre Franç.), to be passion-ately fond of. Bohem. blazen, a fool, madman, blazinti sie, to become mad, to be violently in love with. Malay gili, foolish, mad, foolishly fond.—Marsden. Yorkshire fond, simple, foolish, doting ; fondy, Sw. dial. fante, a simpleton. ON. fáni, Sw. fäne, a fool. Gael. faoin, vain, foolish, idle, empty ; faoin-cheann, an empty head ; Lat. vanus, empty.
Font. Lat. fons, fontis, a well, spring of water, applied in English to the well of baptism, the vessel which contains the water of baptism.
Food.—Feed. — Foster. AS. foda, fode, food, nourishment. Du. voeden, to feed, to bring up ; Goth. fodjan, to nour-ish, to bring up ; OSax. fodjan, ON., Sw. föda, Dan. föde, to feed, and also to bear, or give birth to. Dan. fodsel, birth, de-livery. Du. voedsel, food, nutriment. The ideas of giving birth to, and feed-ing, or bringing up, are connected in other cases, as Gael. àlaich bring forth, nourish; Sw. ala, to give birth to, to educate, to feed, and Lat. alere, to nourish. The Du. voedster, a nurse, voedsteren, to bring up, voedsterkind, a child entrusted to one to bring up, show the formation of AS. foster, food, Sw. foster, birth, progeny, *fostra*, to bring up, *fostri*, a foster-child. In the same way Sw. alster, progeny, from ala, to beget.

Fool. Fr. fol, foolish, idle, vain. W. ffol, foolish. Bret., OCat. foll, mad. The fundamental meaning seems to be a failure to attain the end proposed, a wandering from the straight path. It would thus be connected with the root of E. fail, and Lat. fallere, to deceive. The Old Psalter of Corbie quoted by Raynouard has Foleai si com oeille que perit. Erravi sicut ovis quæ perit.—Ps. 118. De tes commandemens ne foliai De mandatis tuis non erravi.—Ibid. Folier en droit, en fait, to err in law, or in fact.—Roquef. It is probably the true equivalent of the Goth. dwals, out of his senses, where we see the same connection with the notion of straying or wandering, and also that of deceiving or causing to miss. AS. dwala, dwola, error; dwelian, dwolian, Du. dolen, Pl.D. dwalen, to stray (identical with folier of the Fr. psalter above quoted), to wander, either in a literal or metaphorical sense, to err in judgment, to be out of his senses; Du. dul, dol, out of his mind, mad; E. dial. dull, foolish. Du. dwaalen, doolen, to stray, wander; dwaalende, or doolende ridder, a knight-errant; dwaal-licht, ignis fatuus, ignis erraticus, Fr. feu-follet, a wandering light, or perhaps an ineffectual light. Du. dolle-bezien, a name given to different kinds of berries dangerous or unfit for eating.—Marin. Dolle-kervel, hemlock, fools-parsley, properly fool-parsley, parsley which 'errs' from its proper destination, which does not fulfil its apparent purpose, looking like a wholesome herb but really poisonous. So Fr. avoine folle, wild or barren oats. The same equivalence of an initial dw and f is seen in Du. dweil or feil, a mop or clout, and possibly in Du. dwaep, and E. fop, fool, and Sc. dweble, limber, weak, and E. feeble.

Foot. Du. voet, G. fuss, Gr. πούς, ποδός, Lat. pes, pedis.

Fop. A fantastical fellow, one over-nice and affected in dress, speech, and behaviour.—B. A fop, or fool; foppery, foolery (Minsheu), trickery. 'The grossness of the foppery [of the pretended fairies].'—Merry Wives, v. 5. Du. Jemand voor Æsop houden, to make a fool of one; foppen, to deride, to mock. It. fiappe, fiapparie, a flap with a foxtail, flappings, fopperies, an idle babbling, vain discourse; fiappatore, a flapper, fopper.—Fl. For.—Fore.—Former.—Foremost. Goth. faur, faura, ON. fyrir, before, fore, for; G. vor, fore; für, for. The radical meaning in both cases is in front of. When we speak of one event as before or after another, our own progress in time is transferred to the events of the world, which are typified as a succession of animated beings moving on in the opposite direction, and taking place in time at the moment when they are brought face to face with the witness. Thus the event of the present moment is before or in front of the train of futurity, and those which have already passed by the instant of actual experience, are in front of the present event, by which they are succeeded. The events then which have passed into the region of memory, although in reference to our own progress in life considered as left behind us, yet in the order of their own succession are more to the front than the present, and are therefore spoken of as belonging to former or more fore times. In expressing the relation of cause or rational inducement, the cause or reason is considered as standing in front of the effect, or the consequence for which it is made to account. Lat. præ, before, also in comparison with, by reason of, on account of. For in composition answers to G. ver, Goth. fair, Fr. for, and has the meaning of G. fort, Dan. bort, forth, away, Lat. foris, without, Fr. fors, out, without. Thus to forbid is to bid a thing away; to forget, to away-get, to lose from memory; to forgo, to go without; to forfend, to ward off. In Fr. we have forbannir, to drive forth, forchasser, to shoot away, forclorre, to shut out, to forclose, forjeter, to jut out, and in a figurative sense for-conte, a misreckoning, forfait, a misdeed, forjuger, to judge wrongfully, or amiss, as well as to deprive by judgment; for-jurer, to renounce, abjure, while in E. forswear, to swear wrongfully, the particle has the same force as in Fr. forjuger, forparler, to speak ill. In other instances the prefix for in the sense of out or utterly implies that the action has been carried to its utmost limits, that it is completely expended, and has finished its work. Forwearied is wearied out; forswunk and forswat is worn out with labour and sweat.
Forage. See Fodder.
Force. It. forza, Mid.Lat. fortia, for fortia, from fortis, strong.—Diez. Fr. force, strength, virtue, efficacy, also store, plenty, abundance.—Cot. Hence may be understood an expression formerly common both in Fr. and E. Je ne fais point force de cela, I force not of that thing, I care not of it, I set no store by it, do not regard it as of consequence.
To Force. To clip or shear. Forcyn, or clyppyn, tondeo.—Pr. Pm. To force wool, to cut off the upper or most hairy part of it.—B. Fr. forcer de la laine, to pick or tease wool. Forces, a pair of shears; forcette, a cizar, or small pair of shears.—Cot. The Fr. fourches, forches, forces, were applied to different kinds of forked structures, as a gallows, a pair of shears.
Près forces fit pendre le cors Près de la ville par dehors.
Forche, ciseaux, tenailles, pincettes.—Roquefort. For the same reason we call shears the tall gallows used for masting ships. There can be no doubt that the first syllable in Lat. forfex, forceps, cizars, pincers, has the same origin.
* Forcemeat. As forcemeat is commonly used as synonymous with stuffing, it was natural to explain it from Fr. far-cir, Lim. forci, to stuff. The two, however, are clearly distinguished in the Liber Cure Cocorum, where the equivalent of Fr. farcir is constantly written farse, while fors is often used in the sense of spice or season.
Take mylke of almondes— Fors it with cloves or good gyngere.—p. 8.
But the white [pese] with powder of pepper tho Moun be forsyd, with ale thereto.—p. 46.
Powder thou take Of gynger, of kanel, that gode is, tho Enfors it wele.—p. 38.
Forcemeat, then, is spiced, highly-seasoned meat.
Forcer.—Forcet. OFr. forcier, It. forciere, Mid.Lat. forsarius, a strong box, safe, coffer.
Fortune by strengthe the forcer hath unshete, Wherein was sperde all my worldly richesse. Chaucer.
Forcelet, strong place, fortalicium.—Pr. Pm.
Ford. A shallow place in a river. Quite distinct from W. ffordd, a way, and from the root fare, to go. G. furt, ON. brot, Pol. bród, a ford; brodzić, to wade, to ford. Bohem. brédu, brjsti, to be wet, to ford; brod, a swim, a ford; broditi, to swim or water horses, sheep, &c.; brodítse, to paddle in the water. Lith. brydis, a wading in the water; bradá, water or mud through which one must wade in the road; brasta, a ford. Russ. bruizgat', bruiznut', to splash.
Foreign. It. forense, forene, forese, foresano, Fr. forain, outlandish, belonging to what is without; Lat. foras, foris, without, out of doors, abroad; It. fuora, fuore, fuori, forth, without, out of, except; Fr. hors, OFr. fors, out, without, except. Walach. fară, fóră, without, besides, except. See For (in composition).
Forensic. Lat. forensis, from forum, a civil court.
Forest. It. foresta, Fr. forêt, properly a wilderness, or uncultivated tract of country, but as such were commonly overgrown with trees the word took the meaning of a large wood. We have many forests in England without a stick of timber upon them. Probably identical with W. gores, gorest, waste ground, waste, open; goresta, to lie open, lie waste, whence E. gorse, gorst, furze, the growth of waste land.
To Forestall. To monopolise, to buy goods before they are brought to stall, or the place where they are to be sold at market.
Forfeit. Fr. forfait, a crime, misdeed, from forfaire, to misdo, transgress.
My heart nor I have doen you no forfeit, By which you should complain in any kind. Chaucer in R.
Oro omnes quibus aliquid forefeci ut mihi per suam gratiam indulgeant.— Pontanus in Duc. The expression for a crime or misdeed was then transferred to the consequences or punishment of the crime. Forisfactus servus, in the laws of Athelstan, is one who has misdone himself a slave, one who for his misdeeds is made a slave. Forfaire ses heritages; forfaire corps et avoir, to misdo away his heritage, his body, and goods, i. e. to lose them by his misdeed.— Duc. Forfaicture, a transgression, also a forfeiture or confiscation.—Cot.
To Forfend. To fend off, ward off. See For.
Forge. The Lat. faber, a smith, by the change of b through v into u, gave rise to OFr. faur, Walach. fauru, a smith. In the latter language we have also făurie, a smith's shop, făuri, to forge, the i of which seems in the Western dialects to have passed into a j', producing It. forgia, Fr. farge. Swiss Rom. favro, favre, a smith, blacksmith, carpenter; faverdge, fouerdge, fordze, a forge.
To Forge on. In nautical language is for a ship to make its way slowly and laboriously on, as it were by successive shoves. Swiss, Bav. futschen, to slide, to shove on, as children on their rumps.—Schmeller. See Fidget. To fudge, to poke with a stick, to walk slowly, though with considerable exertion (to move by successive slips).—Crav. Gl.
Fork. Lat. furca, w. fforch, AS. forc, ON. forkr, Fr. fourche. W. fforch-droed, a cloven foot. The original meaning of fork seems a pointed instrument for thrusting with. It. frugare, to poke. See Fruggin.
Forlorn. G. verloren, lost, from verlieren, Du. verliesen, to lose. AS. forleosan and forleoran.
Form. I. Fr. forme, a form, or fashion, also a long bench or form to sit on, also a hare's form.—Cot. The latter is probably so called from the hare leaving a form or mould of herself in the long grass where she lies.
2. The name of forma was also given to the seat of the choristers in a cathedral and the desk in front of them. Formula, a stool to kneel on.—Duc. There can be no doubt that this is essentially the same application with the name of the classes at our public schools, first form, sixth form, &c., but whether the class is called form from sitting on the same bench, or whether the bench is so designated from being occupied by a single class, may be a question. It seems certain that forma was used for class or order in the lower Latin. ' Supernumerarii sacri ministerii primæ vel secundæ formæ',' of the first or second order.—Cod. Theodos. de Castrensianis in Duc.
Formidable. Lat. formido, dread.
Fornication. Lat. fornicatio, from fornix, a vault, a word accommodated to the sense of brothel or stews.
To Forsake. Properly to put away the subject of dispute, to renounce or deny, then simply to desert. OE. sake, dispute, strife. — Layamon. AS. sacan, sacian, to contend, strive ; withersaca, an opponent.
And if a man me it axe, Six sithes or seven, I forsake it with othes.—P. P.
Forse. In the N. of England, a water-fall ; Stockgill-forse, Airey-forse. Norse fors, foss,—a. waterfall, the spray or dashing of broken water. Dæ sto fossen fyre baat'a, the waves broke over the boat ; fossa, forsa, to break as water, dash in spray ; frosa, Sw. frusa, to gush.—Aasen. w. ffrwd, a torrent ; ffrydio, to flow, to gush. See Froth.
Fort. — Fortalice. — Fortress. A strong place ; Fr. fort, Lat. fortis, strong.
Forth. — Further. AS. forth, Du. voord, MHG. vort, G. fort, forth, onward, forward. Forth nihtes, far on in the night. The comparative is Du. voorder, G. vorder, further, more onward. No doubt a development of Du. voor, E. fore, for, Lat. pro.
Fortune. Lat. fortuna, from fors, chance, luck.
Fosse. — Fossil. Lat. fodio, fossum, to dig, dig out.
Fosset. See Faucet.
Foster. See Fodder.
Fother. Properly a carriage load, but now only used for a certain weight of lead. With him there was a plowman was his brother, That had ylaid of dong full many a fother. Chaucer.
Pl.D. fader, foor, Du. voeder, voeyer, voer, G. fuder, fuhr, a waggon-load ; whence respectively voeren, voeren, führen, to drive, convey, carry.
The root is largely developed in the Slavonic languages. Lith. wedu, westi, to lead ; wadas, a guide ; wezu, weszti, to carry in a waggon, szenu wezimas, a load of hay. Esthon. weddama, to lead, to draw ; iveddo-harg, a draught-ox. Fin. wedan, wetää, to draw. Bohem. wedu, westi, to lead, to bring ; wod, a guide ; wezu, westi, to carry. Serv. woditi, to lead, wozati, to carry, wojenye, wozanye, carriage.
Foul.—Filth.—Defile. Goth. fuls, ON. full, Stinking, corrupt. This is the primary meaning of the word, which is then applied to what is dirty, turbid, physically or morally disgusting, ugly, unfair. We speak of foul, as opposed to clear weather ; of a ship running foul of another, as opposed to keeping clear of it. Dan. at rage uklar (unclear) med et Skib, to run foul of a ship.—The ON. full was applied to one who had not come clear from the ordeal by fire. The Du. vuil, and G. faul, have acquired the sense of lazy, slothful.
It is seen, under Faugh, that the interj. representing rejection of an offensive smell takes the form of fu ! or fu ! From the former of these arise Sanscr. pûy, to stink, to rot ; Lat. puteo, to be foul, to stink; puter, rotten, stinking, and so from the form fu! are Gael, fuath (pro-nounced fuah), Manx feoh, disgust, abhor-rence, hatred; fuathail, fuathachail, loathsome, hateful, Manx feohoil, filthy, foul; ON. fui, putridity; fuinn, full, stinking; fyla, stink, and, as a verb, to putrefy; AS. fulan, befulan, befylan, to rot; Du. vuilen, to dirty, to putrefy.

* Foumart. Variously spelt foulmart, folmert, fulmarde, fulmer.—Hal. G. stink-marder, a polecat, from the foul smell of the animal. Fr. marte, martin, an animal of the weasel kind. See Polecat.

To Found, -found.—Fund. Lat. fundus, ground, bottom; fundare, to lay the groundwork, to found. Profundus, having the bottom far onwards, deep, profound. From land being the ultimate source of all wealth, fund is used to signify a permanent source of income.

-found.—Confound. See -fuse.

Founder.—Founderous. The meanings of E. founder are derived from two sources which it is sometimes impossible to distinguish, although for the most part the senses can be referred with confidence to their proper origin.

I. From Lat. fundus, Fr. fond, the ground or bottom, afondrer, to sink as a ship, to founder, or go to the bottom. Moult vessiez harnas floter Hommes noier et afondrer.—R. R.

From It. fondo, the bottom of a cask, are sfondare, sfondolare, to break out the bottom of a cask, and met. to ruin or render useless; sfondolare, sfondare, to founder as a horse.—Fl. When applied to a road sfondato is what is called in English indictments a founderous road, a hollow, broken way wherein a man sinks, a bottom-broken way. Enfondrer un chemin, to wear or make great holes in a way, to make a deep way; chemin effondré, a way full of holes or miry sloughs; enfondrer un harnois, to make a great dint in an armour.'—Cot. It. sfondare una porta, to break open a door;—uno squadrone, to rout or break through a squadron.—Altieri. Hence we may explain a passage misunderstood by Ellice and Jamieson.

'He foundered the Saracens o' twaine And fought as a dragon.—R. Brunne.

The other Fr. verb which we have borrowed, under the shape of founder, is fondre, to melt, (and hence) to sink, fall, or go down; se fondre, to sink down on a sudden.—Cot. La terre fondit sous lui, gave way under him.—Trevoux. 'In Cheshire a quantity of earth foundered

FRAME and fell down a vast depth.'—Aubrey's Wilts in Hal. Se fondre d'enhaut, to fall down plump.—Cot. From this source we must probably, with Jamieson, explain Sc. founder, to fell, strike down, give such a blow as to stupefy one, and also the sense of stumbling, falling, or sinking down. To founder as a horse, trebucher.—Palsgr. in Way. The horse of Arcite, being frightened by a prodigy—began to turn And lepe aside and founderid as he lepe, And ere that Arcite may takin kepe He pight him on the pomell of his hede That in the place he lay as he were dede. In Douglas' Virgil, Priam is said to founder, or slip down, in the new-spilt blood of his son.

Founder.—Foundry. A brass-founder is one who melts and casts brass, from Lat. fundere, to pour, Fr. fondre, to melt, or cast in moulds.

Foundling. An infant found deserted. So bantling from band, darling from dear.

Fountain. Fr. fontaine, Lat. fans, fontis, a spring of water.

Four. AS. feother, feower, Goth. fid-vor, W. pedwar, Gr. τέττορες, τέσσαρες, Walach. patru, Lat. quatuor, Lith. keturi, Sanscr. chatwar, Ir. ceathair.

Fowl. Goth. fugls, G. vogel, AS. fugol, fugol, a bird, from flug, flight, by the loss of the l; as in modern times, fugleman from G. flügel-mann, from flügel, a wing. The same degradation seems to have taken place in Lat. fugere, to fly. Compare AS. fugol, a fugitive.

Fox. Goth. fauho, G. fuchs.

Fracas. Fr. fracas, wracks, destruc-tion, havoc, hurlyburly.—Cot. It. fracasso, tracasso, any manner of rumbling or ruinous noise, as the falling of houses, trees, walls, or thunderclaps, wrack, havoc; hurlyburly, breaking in pieces, trampling underfoot.—Fl. An onomatopoeia analogous to Fr. patatra, or pa-tatras, representing the clatter of falling things.—Trevoux.

Fraction.—Fragile.—Fragment. Lat. frango, fractum, to break. From a representation of the noise of breaking by the syllable frac as in It. fracasso. See Fracas.

Frail. Fr. frêle, from fragile, Lat. fragilis, easily broken.

Frail. OFr. frayel, fréau, a mat-basket. 'Fyggys, raysins in frayel.'—Cœur de Lion in Way.

* Frame.—To Frame. To frame is to dispose, adapt, construct, compose, contrive.

I have been a truant to the law; I never yet could frame my will to it, And therefore frames the law unto my will. Hen VI.

To frame a story is to arrange it for a certain purpose. Hence frame, disposition, structure, construction, fabric. The frame of mind is the disposition of the mind; out of frame, out of adjustment, out of joints; a frame of timber, a construction of timber (for an ulterior purpose). We are, I believe, led on a wrong scent by the ON. frama, fremja (from fram, forth, forwards), to promote, advance, execute, fulfil, accomplish; AS. fremman, gefremman, OHG. gafremjan, to perform. Hæla gefremman, to do cures.—Luc. xiii. 32. Helpe gefremman, to give help; man gefremman, to work wickedness. The true relations of our word lie in a different quarter. It can hardly be doubted that G. rahme, rahmen, Du. raem, raam, Da. ramme, frame, as of a picture, window, looking-glass, the solid structure by which these objects are held together, are the true correlatives of the E. word, as well as of Bret. framm, timber framework of a house, joint, joining. Framma, to adjust, unite, solder, join.
The origin may be traced to ON. hrammr, the paw or clutch of a beast, the initial h of which corresponds to the f of frame and is wholly lost in Sw. ram, paw, clutch, frame, as in ON. hrim, Da. riim, compared with Fr. frimas, or in OHG. riban, ripan, compared with Fr. friper, to wear. Hence ON. hremma, Sw. rama, to clutch, to seize; ram, seizure (Rietz), opportunity. Se sitt ram, to see his opportunity; passa ram, to watch his opportunity [of seizure]; rama, to scheme, to devise (Ihre); berama dag, Du. dag raamen, to appoint a day (Holtrop); ramen, to aim, hit, plan; beramen, to concert, contrive, dispose.—Bomhoff. Raemen (passen), to adjust, to fit, convenire, quadrare.—Kil. Raemen nae jemands dood, machinari mortem, to frame his death. G. rahmen, Du. raam, E. frame is a structure adapted for a particular purpose, as for stretching cloth, for holding embroidery, a picture, &c.
Franchise.—Frank. Fr. franc, free, liberal, courteous, valiant, sincere.—Cot. Supposed to be taken from the name of the Franks, the conquerors of Gaul, the only free men remaining when the former inhabitants were reduced to a servile condition. ON. Frackr, a Frank, Frenchman, also free, freeborn. In charters of the year 799 ingenuus, nobilis, and francus are synonymous.—Duc.
It seems however more probable that the name of the Franks should have been taken from the idea of freedom rather than vice versâ, and the original sense of the word is probably shown in Bret. frank, spacious, wide. A person in freedom is said in Fr. to be au large. Bret. frankaat, to enlarge, make or become wider, free from, deliver.
Frantic.—Frenzy. Fr. frénétique, frénésie, Lat. phreneticus, from Gr. φρηνι-τικός, disorder of the (φρήν) mind.
Franzy.—Frangy.—Frany. Commonly applied to children, peevish, fretful. Fris. wrante, to complain as young children, to be peevish; wrannig, ill-tempered, peevish.—Outzen.
Fraternal. Lat. frater, a brother.
Fraud. Lat. fraus, fraudis.
Fray. See Affray.
To Fray. Fr. frayer, to rub, or fret by often rubbing, to wear, make smooth by much using.—Cot. The deer frays its head, rubs its horns against a tree. Lat. fregare, Lat. fricare, to rub.
Freak. A sudden wanton whim or caprice, a flighty humour, or fancy.—R.
O but I fear the fickle freaks, quoth she, Of Fortune false.—F. Q.
Freak, like caprice, expresses an act without apparent motive, and is therefore referred to a violent internal desire. It. frega, a longing desire, or itching lust—Fl.; fregola, longing, fancy, humour, itching desire. 'Gli venne la fregola d'andare alla campagna:' the freak took him to go to the country.—Altieri.
The origin is the verb fregare, to rub, to move lightly to and fro, expressing the restless condition of one under the influence of strong desire, as in Fr. fretiller, to wag, stir often, to wriggle, tickle, itch to be at it.—Cot.
2. Another sense of freak is seen in Milton's 'Pansy freaked with jet,' i. e. streaked. This also is from It. fregare, to streak, frego, a dash, stroke, touch, line.—Alt. Fr. fricfrac expresses the sound made by strokes to and fro with a switch. See Firk.
3. A third sense of freak was a man.
By Chryst quod Favell Drede is soleyne freke. Skelton in R.
In this sense the word is a modification of ON. reckr, OHG. recke, OE. renk, rink, ON. drengr, a warrior. See Drake.
Freckle. Provincially freckens or frackens. ON. frekna, N. friikne, frokle.

flukr, freckles.—Aasen. G. fleck, flecken, a blot, spot, stain ; flecken von der sonne, freckles. Gael, breac, speckled ; broice, broicean, a mole, a freckle. W. brith, brych, Bret, briz or bridh, speckled, parti-coloured. Free. AS. freo, ON. fri, Goth. frija.

Freebooter.—Filibuster. Freeboot-er is one who without the authority of national warfare makes free to appropri-ate as booty whatever falls under his hand. The name was especially given to the buccaneers who infested the coast of America in the 16th and 17th centu-ries, and was pronounced by the Fr. flibustiers, by the Spaniards filibuster. From the latter has arisen in the present age the term fillibuster, a name given in America to adventurers making piratical expeditions against states of Spanish race.

To Freeze.—Frigid.—Frost.—Frieze. It has been shown under Caprice and Chitterling that the representation of a vibrating sound is used to express a quivering, vibratory motion, and thence an undulating, wrinkled, or curly surface. A further development of the train of thought applies the forms signifying shivering to the affections of cold or fear, as most distinctly characterized by the symptom of shivering. On this principle may be connected a numerous series of words founded on the representation of a rustling, simmering, twittering noise, by the syllables friss, frit, frik, frig.

In the original sense we may cite Sw. frasa, to rustle ; frasa, to whizz, roar, hiss ; Sc. frais, to make a crackling, or crashing noise—Jam. ; Fr. frissement d'un trait, the whizzing of an arrow ; Sp. frez, the rustling of silk-worms on mul-berry leaves, fresar, to growl ; Piedm. fricioli, the noise made by things frying ; frige, frise, the noise of things beginning to boil, simmering ; It. friggere, fresso, fretto, to whimper as a child, to fry ; Lat. frigere (originally to twitter or fizz, as shown by the derivatives frigilla, a finch, frigutire, to chatter), to fry ; Gr. φρίσσω, φρίττω, to rustle, φρύγω, φρύσσω, φρύττω, to parch, or fry.

In the sense of shivering ; Fr. la voile frise, the sail shivers in the wind ; fris-son, a shudder ; G. φρίσσω, φρίττω, to shiver from cold or fear ; φρίκη, shudder-ing, chill, fear ; Du. vriesen, to tremble with cold—Overyssel Almanac ; Pl.D. vresen, vreren, to tremble for cold, to be cold ; E. freeze, applied to the effect of cold in solidifying liquids. It is probable that the Lat. frigere, frigutire, to be cold, have the same origin, and thus oddly enough are radically identical with frigere, to fry.

Frieze. 1. The transition from the idea of shivering to that of a rough, un-even surface is exemplified in Lat. hor-rere, to shudder, horridus, rough ; E. shag, or shog, to shake or jog, and shaggy, rough, tufted ; and (in the case of the root we are now considering) in Gr. φρίξ, bristled, rough, with curled hair ; Fr. friser, to frizzle, crisp, curl (as water blown on by a gentle wind), to wriggle—Cot. ; E. frizzle, to curl, or wrinkle up. On the same principle the name of frieze is given to coarse, shaggy cloth, by false etymology supposed to have come from Friesland, in the same way that a frizzled hen is called a Fries-land hen, or a kind of duck with musky odour, a Muscovy duck. Fr. frise, espèce de toile de laine frisée ; toile forte de la province de Frise.—Gattel.

2. The application of the root to a surface plaited or roughened with orna-mented work gives Fr. fraise, freze, Piedm. freja, a ruff, or frill ; Fr. frizons, frizzled, or raised work of gold or silver wire, &c.—Cot. ; Sp. fres, gold or silver lace ; Mid.Lat. aurifrasium, aurifrisia, aurifregia, OFr. orfrais, E. orfray, a border or fringe of gold, band of gold lace ; It. fregio, Fr. frize, E. frieze, frize, the ornamented border running beneath the cornice in architecture. Piedm. fris, frieze ; also a band or border for the ornament of garments or furniture ; fris d' fioret, a ferret band, fris d' lana, a worsted border. Mid.Lat. frisare, to ornament with borders or embroidery. 'Item quod pannos earum non possint aliter frisare vel ornare nisi cum duplonis aureis vel argenteis seu setâ.'—Carp. 'Pallium unum cum friso et margaritis.'—Duc.

It is remarkable that the conversion of frieze into Frisian cloth is only a repeti-tion of the same etymological blunder which in ancient times seems to have given the name of Phrygian work to wriggled or frizzled work, embroidery or tissue ornamented or roughened with needlework, showing that the It. fregio is of ancient standing in the Latin lan-guage. Pictas vestes acu facere Phryges invenerunt ideoque Phrygioniae appellatæ sunt.—Plin. Phrygio, an embroiderer. In Mid.Lat. phrygium, and phrysum, were used for a border of embroidery. 'Planetam purpuream aureis phrygiis mensium duodecim signa in se habentibus ornatam.' 'Planetam purpuream cum phryso et cum aquilâ ex margaritis contextâ.'—Duc.

FREIGHT.—Fraught. G. fracht, Fr. fret, the loading of a waggon or ship, and secondly the money paid for the conveyance. G. ferchen, to despatch, to expedite ; Swiss ferken, ferggen, to forward goods, to convey them in a waggon ; fergg, gfergg, conveyance, waggon ; ferggete, transport of wares.

Frenzy. See Frantic.

Frequent. Lat. frequens, that often comes or is done.

Fresh. AS. fersc, Du. versch, frisch, ON. friskr, It. fresco, Fr. fraische, frais, recent, new, and sweet, cool, in full vigour. The original sense is probably to be sought in E. frisk, indicating lively movement, exertion for the mere pleasure of the thing ; Fr. frisque, lively, brisk, spruce, gay.—Cot. N. frisk, lively, healthy, sound.—Aasen. Then as briskness or friskiness is worn out by continued exertion or fatigue, by heat, or by lapse of time, the term is applied to what is unworn, untired, unheated, unkept, recent. Meat is adapted for keeping by salting, whence fresh or unkept meat is opposed to salt meat, and by extension water fit for drinking, as opposed to salt water, is called fresh. See Frisk.

Fret. We traced under Freeze the development of a number of forms having a wide range of signification, from the representation of a rustling, quivering sound by the radical syllable fris, frij, frig, and a series separated from the above by no definite line, but solely by the convenience of practical illustration, may be deduced from the same original image represented by the syllables frit, fric, friss.

1. Fret, the stop or key of a musical instrument. The direct representation of sound gives Lat. fritinire, to twitter as a swallow ; fritillus, the box in which the dice are rattled previous to being thrown on the board ; It. frizzare, to quaver with the voice, or run nimbly on an instrument—Fl. ; Fr. fredonner, to shake, divide, quaver in singing or playing ; fredon, a semiquaver in music, and hence division, and a warbling or quavering.—Cot. Hence E. fret, properly a note in music, then the stops on a stringed instrument by which the note was sounded. The monkish poet, in a Life of Bishop Amandus, who as a boy had a wonderful gift of singing, uses fritillos in the sense of notes. Quis docuit puerum, qui sensus quæso suasit, Hebraico sonitu ignotos proferre fritillos. Ducange. Henschel.

2. To fret, to work, as liquor in a slight state of fermentation. From direct imitation of the simmering sound made by the small bubbles rising and breaking. It. frizzare, to spirt or startle, as good wine doth being poured into a flat glass.—Fl. Pied. friciolè, the noise made in frying.—Zalli.

3. To fret, to rub, wear, consume, eat up. Fretted, worn by rubbing ; vexed, discomposed, ruffled in mind.—B. From the sense of a quivering sound, as in the series mentioned under Freeze, the root passes on to signify a quivering motion. Fr. fretiller, to move, wag, stir often, wriggle, tickle—Cot. ; E. fritters, shivers, fragments ; to frit, to rub or move up and down ; W. ffrid, ffrit, a sudden start or jerk ; It. frizzare, to frisk or skip nimbly.—Fl. Du. writselen, vritselen, motitari, subsilire—Kil. ; wrikken, Dan. vrikke, to wriggle or joggle ; Lat. fricare, to rub ; It. fregare, to rub, frig, frit, friggle ; fregagione, rubbing, or fritting up and down gently, as is the custom to sick people.—Fl. Prov. fregar, fretar, to rub ; Fr. froter, to rub, chafe, fret, or grate against.—Cot. Bav. fretten, to rub (as a key wearing a hole in one's pocket), and figuratively, to plague, to worry. Swiss, fretten, fratten, to become sore by rubbing ; Bav. fratt, Du. vraet, a place galled by rubbing, whence probably a wart, AS. vrat, originally the callus produced by rubbing. The sense of wearing away, consuming by rubbing, passes into that of gnawing, eating away, eating up, so that it is often impossible in the figurative use of the word to say whether it has reference simply to the annoyance and soreness produced by rubbing, or to the more exaggerated figure of eating up. Hans Sachs uses fretten for drilling a hole in a coin.—Schmeller. To fret, as cloth, is to wear by rubbing, but when we speak of fretting by moths we pass to the notion of eating, as in G. von motten gefressen, moth-eaten. These wormes ne these mothes ne these mites Upon my paraille fret hem never a del ; And wost thou why ? for they were used well. Wife of Bath. Goth. fuglos fretun, the fowls consumed them. Sw. frata, to corrode, to prey upon ; frata sig af sorg, to fret with grief, as G. von gram gefressen, consumed with grief.
We have the same connection between the senses of consuming insensibly and eating in G. zehren (the equivalent of E. tear), to wear away, waste, eat and drink; Sw. tära, to consume, corrode, wear away, eat; tära sig sjelf, to fret oneself; tära sig af sorg, to fret with sorrow. In both cases the fundamental meaning is the notion of wearing away; consump-tion by eating, a secondary application.
The possibility of resolving the word into a compound of the particle ver or fra (ver-eten, ver-essen, Goth. fraitan, to eat up), exhibits a source of confusion which not unfrequently perplexes the etymology of words with an initial fr-. So Kiliaen explains vriezen, to freeze, as ver-ijsen, to become ice, and the Brem. Wörter-buch, vresen, to fear, as 'without doubt,' from ver and aisen, eisen, to shudder. And see Fright.
4. Fret, ornamented work in embroid-ery, or carving, synonymous with Sp. fres, gold lace; It. fregio, Piedm. fris, Mid. Lat. frisum, frisium, list, lace, ornamented border.
About the sides shall run a fret Of primroses.—Drayton in R.
Iclothid was this mighty God of Love In silk embroidered full of grene greves, In which there was a fret of red rose-leaves. Chaucer. Legend Good Women, 228.
In the same poem the Queen of Love is said to wear on her hair a fret of gold surrounded with a crown of pearls, the comparison of which to the yellow centre of a daisy set off by the white petals of the ray shows that the term is by no means constantly applied either to a bor-der or a circlet.
The origin, as above explained in the case of frieze, is to be found in the notion of quivering or shaking, conceived as curling the surface of a liquid and throw-ing it into vibrations, offering a type of embroidered or sculptured ornamentation.
So Fr. fringoter, to quaver, or divide in singing, also to fret or work frets in gold, silver, &c.; fringoteries, frets, cranklings, wriggled flourishes in carving, &c.—Cot. In like manner It. frizzare, Fr. frédonner, to quaver in singing, E. fritter, to shiver, lead to Fr. frizons, frizzled or raised work of gold or silver wire, &c., and E. fret, in the sense of carved or embroidered work.
5. Fret in Heraldry and Architecture is from a totally different root, signifying the interlacing of bars or fillets. OFr. fréter, croiser, entrelacer.—Roquefort.

Frets in heraldry are bars crossing each other in lozenge-shape, and interlacing, fretted, interlaced. A fretted roof is one ornamented by bands or fillets crossing each other in different patterns.
In the expression fretised roof, fretise is a collection of frets, as lattice a collect-ion of laths, brattice, of brets, or boards.
The sense of interlacing is taken from the notion of an iron grating. The It. ferrata, the grating of a window, or the like, becomes frá in Piedm., while fret in the latter dialect corresponds to It. fer-retto, any little implement of iron. Hence Fr. frete, the verril or iron ring that keeps a tool from riving, iron hoop round the nave of a wheel; Sp. fretes, the bands forming the body of a shield.—Neumann; and Fr. frettes (pl.), according to Diez, an iron grating.
Fribble. 'To fribble, to trifle, to totter like a weak person.—Todd. 'How the poor creature fribbles in his gait.'—Tatler 49. To be explained from Central Fr. friboler, to flutter, flit to and fro without fixed purpose like a butterfly; barivoler, to flutter in the wind.—Jaubert. Fari-boles, fond tattling, trifles, flimflams.—Cot. A similar metaphor is seen in Walach. farfală (q. flattergeist), a trifler, compared with It. farfalla, a butterfly. Probably Lat. frivolus may be from the same ultimate root.
Fricassee. Fr. fricasser, to fry. Lat. frigere, frixum, from the hissing sound.
Friction. Lat. frico, frictum, to chafe, rub. See Fridge.
Friday. AS. Frige-dæg, G. Frey-tag, the day sacred to Frigga, or Freya, the Saxon Venus, as Lat. Dies Veneris, Fr. Vendredi.
Fridge.—Frig.—Friggle.—Frit. To fridge or frig about.—Skinner. Rapid vibratory movement is expressed by a numerous series of syllables, fch, fg, fp (phip), fidge, fitsch (Swiss fitschen), fit (fitter), flick, flig, flip, flitsch (Bav. flit-schen), flit, and (with an r instead of an l) frick (Lat. fricare), frig, fritsch (It. fric-ciare), frit (w. frit, Fr. fretiller), imitat-ing the sound of switching to and fro with a light implement, or the crackling sound of frying, or rustling of flames, or the like. It. frizzare, to quaver with the voice, to fry or parch, to frisk or skip nimbly; fric-ciare, to rub, claw, wriggle up and down.—Fl., are precise equivalents of E. fridge.
W. frid, frit, a quick start or jerk.
Friend. From Goth. frijon, to love, as fiend, an enemy, from fijan, to hate.
Frieze. See Freeze.

Frigate. Fr. frégate, Sp. fragata, originally a light row-boat. Diez supposes it may be from fabricata, a construction, as Fr. bâtiment, applied to boat, ship, or vessel in general, from bâtir, to build.

Fright. Goth. faurhts, timid ; faurhtei, fear, faurhtjan, to fear. OSax. forohtian, forahtian, forhtian, to fear. AS. forht, G. furcht, Sw. frukta, fear. The O.Saxon forms might lead us to suppose the word to be a compound of Goth. ogan, pret. ohte, to fear ; ON. óga, to shudder at, otta, to terrify ; but this is probably a false scent of the class mentioned under Fret, 3. The more likely origin is the notion of shuddering, expressed by the root fric. Gr. φρίκη, a shuddering from cold or terror ; Mod.Gr. φρικτός, frightful ; φρίττω, to be frightened ; Walach. frică, fright ; fricosu, timorous.

Frill. A plaited band to a garment. For the logical connection between a twittering sound, a shivering vibratory motion, and a curly or wrinkled surface, see Chitterling, Crisp, Caprice. So from W. ffrill, twitter, chatter, we pass to Fr. friller, to shiver for cold, and thence (as from chitter, to shiver, to chitterling, a frill) to E. frill. The same relation is shown under Freeze between Sw. frasa, to rustle, Fr. friser, to shiver, and fraise, a frill or ruff. And Sw. frasa, Fr. friser, lead through E. frizzle to Fr. friller, in the same way in which Sw. brasa, Fr. bresiller, representing the crackling sound of fire, lead to briller, to twinkle ; or in which grisser, gresiller, grisler, to crackle, lead to griller, to wriggle, curl, frizzle. Central Fr. frediller, to shiver.

Fringe. Fr. frange, Rouchi, frinche, It. frangia, Sicil. frinza, G. franse, an ornamented border of hanging threads or plaited work, originally probably of the latter construction. The word may be accounted for in several ways, all leading back to the fundamental notion of a wrinkled structure, expressed by the figure of a vibratory sound, as explained under Freeze.
Thus we may consider the word as a nasalised form of It. fregio, Fr. fraise, a ruff. Pied. fris, a list or border, or, what comes to nearly the same thing, we may derive it from Du. fronssen, Fr. froncer, to plait or wrinkle. Compare Du. grijsen, grijnsen, to grin ; E. crease, and It. grinza, a wrinkle.
On the other hand the Walach. forms fimbrie and frimbie show that frimbia may have been the original form of Lat. fimbria, whence frangia would follow, as cangiare, from cambiare, Fr. songer from somniare. And frimbia might be explained from a form like Du. wrempen, wrimpen, E. frumple. ‘Frangé, fringed, also wrimpled, snipt or jagged on the edges.’—Cot.

Fripery. Worn-out clothes, then the place where old clothes are sold, or such faded finery as is sold by dealers in old clothes. Fr. friper, to rub, to wear to rags ; Du. wrijven, vrijven, to wear, to rub ; OHG. ripan, G. reiben, to rub, wipe, grate ; Sw. rifva, to scratch, tear, grate. The origin seems a form frip, related to the fric in Lat. fricare, to rub, or AS. frician, to dance, as clap to clack, or flip to flick. Light, rapid, reciprocating movement is represented by a number of similar syllables pointed out under Fridge.

Frisk. The use of the roots fric, frit, flic, flit, in the expressions of smart, rapid, repeated movement, has been mentioned under Fridge, Fret, Firk, and in other places. The addition of an s either before or after the final consonant improves the effect in representing the broken rustling sound of multifarious or continued movement. Hence It. frizzare (= frit-s-are), to quaver with the voice, to fry or parch, to spirt as effervescing wine, to frisk or skip nimbly. The same idea is conveyed by E. frisk. ‘Put water in a glass and wet your finger and draw it round about the rim,—it will make the water frisk and sprinkle up in a fine dew.’—Bacon in Todd. Fin. priiskua, to spirt, start out as a spark, exsilio ut scintilla. The same connection between the senses of spirting, starting, and a crackling sound, is seen in Russ. pruiskat', to spirt; pruigat', to leap or spring ; Serv. prigati, to fry. Compare also Bret. fringoli, to quaver with the voice ; fringa, Fr. fringuer, to frisk or frolick ; Serv. vrtziti, to spirt, gush ; vrtzitise, to move quickly to and fro.
As flick and frick are of like effect in expressing movements, we have flisk, to skip or bounce, synonymous with frisk.—Hal.

Frith.—Firth. An arm of the sea, mouth of a great river. ON. fjörðr, fjörðr, Dan. fjord, an arm of the sea. Probably identical with Lat. fretum, a narrow sea, from Gael. frith, small, little, subordinate. Frith-bhaile, a suburb ; frith-cheum, a by-path ; frith-ministeir, a curate ; frith-mhuir (a little sea), an arm of the sea, loch, frith.

The origin of the Gael. term may be traced further back in W. brith, Bret. briz, speckled, parti-coloured, mixed, having the character indicated by the term with which it is joined in a partial degree. W. brith adnabod dyn, partly to know a person; brith-ddiod, table-beer, small-beer. Bret. briz-tiek, a poor cultivator; briz-klenved, a light illness.
Frith. A freeth in N. Wales is a tract of rough land inclosed on the skirts of the mountain and held as common by the proprietors of the district. Frith, unused pasture-land; a field taken from a wood, young underwood, brushwood.—Hal.
Elles foweles fedden hem in frythes ther thei woneden.—P. P. in R.
'By frith and fell.' 'Out of forests and frythes and all faire wodes.'—William and the Werewolf. Gael. frith, a heath, deer-park, forest; frithne, an uninhabited place; Ir. frith, a wild mountainous place.
It seems the same word with Fr. friche, uncultivated condition. Bois en friche, wood newly lopped and let stand till it be grown again. Terre en friche, land untilled or neglected, whereby it becomes overgrown with shrubs and weeds.—Cot. Fresche—Roquef; frestiz; Mid.Lat. fresceium, freschium, friscum, frostium—Carp.; fraustum, frausta terra, frusca terra—Duc., waste land. Fraitis, uncultivated land, pasturage.—Roquef. Frocs, fros, froux, common or void grounds.—Cot. Fraux et pasturages.—Duc. Gael. fraoch, heath, the growth of waste places. Bret. fraost, uncultivated. It. frasche, boughs, bushes, underwood; fratta, any thicket of brakes, brambles, bushes, or briers.—Fl.

**Fritter.** 1. A fried cake. Fr. friture, a frying; frire (pple. frit), Bret. frita, to fry. It. frittare, to fry in a pan, make fritter-wise.—Fl. See Fry.
2. Fritters, fragments, shivers. To fritter a thing away is to dissipate it by bits. A parallel form with flitter, flinder, of the same meaning. The primary origin is the use of frit, in expressing a crackling sound, as in Lat. fritinnire, to twitter, then, a rattling or vibrating motion, as in Lat. fritillus, a dice box; Fr. fretiller, to fidget; Gr. φρίσσω, to tremble from cold or fear. To fritter, then, would signify to shiver, and thence to break to shivers. Compare Du. schateren, to resound, to rattle, with E. shatter.

**Frivolous.** Lat. frivolus. See Fribble.

**To Frizz.—Frizzle.** Fr. frizer, to curl, frizzle, ruffle, wriggle. Sv. frasa, to rustle, crackle, fizz, to spit like a cat. For the connection between the idea of curling and a rustling or crackling sound, see Freeze. Gr. φριξ originally represents a rustling sound, such as that of the wind among trees; it is then applied to the ruffling or curling of the surface of water by the breeze, whence φρίξος, rough, curled.

**Frock.** Froc de moine, a monk's cowl or hood. Mid.Lat. flocus, floccum, frocus, froccus, hroccus, roccus, originally a shaggy cloak, from Lat. floccus, Ptg. frocco, a flock, lock, or tuft of wool. G. rock, an overcoat. The derivation of coat is probably similar.

**Frog.** 1. G. frosche, Du. vorsch.
2. The ornament of an embroidered coat. Ptg. froco, a flock of wool or of silk, chenille de broderie; frofadura, ornaments of embroidery.

**Froise.** A pancake; W. ffroes, an omelet. From the noise of frying. Sw. frasa, to fizz, hiss, crackle. Sw. dial. fres, noise of frying; frassa, to fry.
Whanne he is full in suche a dreme— He routeth with a slepie noyse And broustleth as a monke's froyse When it is thrown into the pan.—Gower in R. See Fizz.

**Frolick.** Gr. froh, fröhlich, in good humour; frohlocken, to sport, to frolick. The syllable lick, lock, is probably the AS. termination lac, ON. leik, signifying state or condition, and preserved in a corrupted form in knowledge, wedlock. OHG. fraw, frawa, joyful, G. freuen, Pl.D. frauen, to rejoice; G. freude, joy. 'Got frouue sela sina.' God bless his soul.—Brem. Wtb. AS. frofer, comfort.

**From.** The primitive sense seems that of ON. framm, Dan. frem, forth, forwards; whence the secondary use of the E. term in indicating the commencement of motion. Goth. Iddja fram, he went on, went further; fram fruma, from the beginning, i. e. as to the beginning, onwards.

**Front.** Lat. frons, frontis. Pol. przod, forepart; przod glowy, the forehead. Na przodzie, in front. Przed, before.

**Frontispiece.** Lat. frontispicium, the forefront of a house. Now applied to the front page of a book, and by corruption to the picture in front of a book.

**Frost.** See Freeze.

**Froth.** ON. fraud, froda, scum, froth. Pl.D. frathen, fraodn, fradem, fraum, steam, vapour; framen, to steam. The analogy of the G. broden, brodem, steam, Du. broem, foam, scum, leaves little doubt that the origin of froth is a representation of the sound of boiling or rushing water. The same train of ideas is repeated with little variation of sound in W. brock, din, tumult, froth; brochi, to fume, to chafe, to bluster; Gael. bruich, bruith, to boil, E. broth, boiling water, and sometimes steam, as when we speak of being in a broth of sweat. Du. bruysen, to murmur, give a confused sound, and also to foam; bruys, foam, scum.—Kil. With an initial fr we have ON. frysa, fryssa, frussa, to snort as a horse; N. frosa, to snort, also as Sw. frusa, to gush; W. ffrwd, Bret. froud, a stream, a torrent; W. ffrydio, to stream, to gush, bringing us to froth, as the result of the gushing or dashing of water.

Frounce. Fr. froncer, fronser, to plait, wrinkle; fronser le front, to knit the brow; fronser la bouche, to twinge the mouth. It. fronza di corda, a coil of cordage, knot of strings. Du. fronssen, fronsselen, fronckelen, to plait, to wrinkle; wronck, a twisting, contortion; wronckelen, to twist, to wrinkle.—Kil. The series of expressions for the idea of wrinkling is very numerous, but they may usually be traced to the image of a crackling, frizzling noise, or to the snarling sounds expressive of ill temper; while it must be remembered that the latter are only a particular instance of the broken sounds which offer the most general type of a broken or rugged surface. Evidence of the imitative origin of frounce is shown in Fr. froncher, to snort like an angry horse. Le destrier Fronche et henist, et regibe des pieds. Roman de Garin. On a similar plan are formed Lat. frendere, fresum (for frensum), to make angry noises, snarl, grind the teeth; Fr. frinson, a finch or twittering bird. And, with an initial gr instead of fr, Du. grinden, to snarl; Fr. groncer, to roar as the sea; grincer, to grind the teeth; Du. grijnzen, to snarl, grumble, frown, knit the brow; It. grinza, a wrinkle.

Froward. ON. frá, Dan. fra, from. Fra top til taa, from top to toe. Froward then is from-ward, turned away from, unfavourable, as to-ward, turned in the direction of an object, favourably disposed to it. ' Me turneth thet neb blithelich toitward to thinge thet me luveth

FRUMENTY and frommard to thinge thet me hateth.'—Ancren Riwle, 254. One turns the face willingly toward things that one loveth, and froward to things that one hateth.

Frown. Immediately from Fr. frogner (preserved in refrogner, to frown, look sourly on—Cot.), which must originally have had the same signification as It. grignare, to snarl, Fr. grogner, to grunt or grumble. Compare grognard, grunting, also pouting or frowning.—Cot. E. dial. frine, to whimper; Sw. dial. frunna, to buzz; fryna, to grin; frunten, wrinkled; frutt, angry, cross.

Frowsy. Probably a corruption of foisty or fusty. P.L.D. fisfrig, close, ill-smelling, like a peasant's room.—Danneil.

To Frub.—Fruggan. As frip and frick are found in the sense of light movement to and fro, frub and frug seem to represent movement of a heavier nature. Like many words beginning with fr- or wr, frub passes into rub on the one side, and fub on the other. W. rhwbio, to rub; N. fubba, to wriggle to and fro. The root frug, in the same sense, has many relatives in E. (friggle, wriggle, &c.), but appears most distinctly in It. frugare, to wriggle up and down, rub, burnish—Fl.; to poke with a stick, to sound, to fumble—Altieri; and with inversion of the r, in furegare, to fumble, grope for, to sweep an oven; furegone, a groper, also a malkin or oven-sweeper. Fr. fourgon, E. fruggan, fruggin, an oven-fork, by which fuel is put into an oven and stirred when it is in it.—Cot. From the same root we must derive the Lat. furca, primarily an implement for poking, and only incidentally one with divided prongs. See Furbish.

Frugal Lat. frux, pl. fruges, the fruits of the earth, corn, &c., was applied met. to what constitutes the worth of a thing, to the fruits of a good life. Emersisse aliquando, et se ad frugem bonam, ut dicitur, recepisse.—Cic. Multa ad bonam frugem ducentia in eo libro continentur.—Gell. Hence homo bonæ frugis or homo frugi, a man of worth, diligent, serviceable, temperate, sober; cœna frugi, a modest repast. Then frugalis, opposed to waste, thrifty.

Fruit. — Fruition. Fr. fruit, Lat. fructus; from fruor, fructus and fruitus, to enjoy.

Frumenty. — Furmenty. Fr. frumentée, furmenty (a kind of wheat gruel).

—Cot. Froment, Lat. frumentum, wheat.
Frump. To flout, jeer or mock, taunt or snub.—B. A contemptuous speech or piece of conduct.—Nares. It also expresses the ill temper of the person who gives the frump. Frumpy, frumpish, peevish, froward ; frump, a cross old woman.—Hal.
The origin is the same as that of the synonymous flout, viz. an imitation of the pop or blurt with the mouth, expressive of contempt or ill humour. The same imitative syllable with a somewhat different application is seen in Bret. fromma. It. frombare, to whizz, while the radical connection between the two ideas is shown by It. frullare, to make a rumbling or whizzing noise ; frulla, a flurt, lirp, phip with one's fingers, a trifle, toy.—Fl.
Then as the mouth is screwed up in thus giving vent to ill temper, the radical imitation of the sound produced gives rise to forms expressing screwing up the mouth, wrinkling the nose, which are afterwards extended to the idea of wrinkling, twisting, or contraction in general. Du. wrempen, wrimpen, G. rümpfen, to distort the mouth or make a wry face in contempt ; Bav. rimpfen, to shrink or crumple, to twist as a worm, to wrinkle as the skin of an old woman ; E. wrimpled, crumpled ; frumple, to wrinkle, crumple, ruffle—Hal. ; AS. hrympelle, a rumple, fold ; E. rimple, rumple, to wrinkle, tumble, or throw into irregular folds.
As G. rumpeln is to rumble or make a rattling noise, E. rumble, to make a low broken noise, it is quite possible that the sense of wrinkling may come direct from that connection between the idea of a broken surface and the image of a broken sound, of which we have had so many instances. See Frounce.

To Frush. From a direct representation of the noise of things breaking. Fr. froisser, to crash, crush, knock, or clatter together.—Cot. It. frusciare, to frush or crush together.—Fl.

Frustrate. Lat. frustra, in vain.

Fry. Properly the spawn of fish, but now applied to the young brood lately spawned. Fr. fray, spawn of fish or frogs. Goth. fraiv, seed ; OS. friofrid, seed, egg ; friosa, to fecundate.
To Fry. From the sputtering noise of things cooking in boiling grease, Lat. frigere, Fr. frire, frire (Vocab. de Vaud.), to fry.

Fub.—Fubsy. Fub, a plump child.—B. A word of analogous formation to bob, dab, dod, signifying a lump, anything thick and short, from the noise of a lump of something thrown on the ground.
Fump, a slap, a blow—Hal. ; Da. dial. fompe, a blow, a fat fleshy person ; fompet, fat, fubsy ; fuddet, thick, and full in the face.

To Fuddle. To make tipsy, to stupefy with drink. A corruption of fuzzle, to make fuzzy, or indistinct with drink.
The first night having liberally taken his drink, my fine scholar was so fusled that, &c.—Anat. Melanch.
To fossle, vossle, to entangle, to confuse business.—Cotswold Gl.
Pl.D. flissig, fuddig, raveled, fuzzy—Brem. Wtb. ; flissig, fusslig, just tipsy enough to speak indistinctly—Danneil ; G. faseln, to feaze, fuzz, ravel, to rave or dote.—Küttner.

Fudge. Fr. dial. fûcke ! feûcke ! like E. pish ! an interjection of contempt ; who cares ! ' Picard, ta maison brûle. Feûcke ! j'ai l'clé dans m'poche ' —fudge ! I've the key in my pocket.—Hécart. From this interjection is the vulgar Fr. se ficher d'une chose, to disregard it. Je m'enfiche, I pish at it, pooh-pooh it, treat it with contempt. Fichez le d'la porte, bid him truss or trudge, turn him out. Fichu, awkward, unacceptable, absurd. Il est fichu, he is gone to pot.—Gattel. Precisely similar expressions are Pl.D. futsch ! begone ; datt is futsch goon, gone to pot—Danneil ; Swiss futsch werden, to fail, to come to nothing. Bav. pfutsch ! expresses a rapid instantaneous movement ; Swab. pfitzen, to disappear.

Fuel.—Fewel. OFr. fouaille, M.Lat. focale, firing, from focus, hearth, fireplace, and thence It. fuoco, Sp. fuego, Fr. feu, fire. Fouailler, the woodyard.—Roquef.

-fuge.—Fugitive. Lat. fugio, Gr. φεύγω, to fly, escape, avoid. Refuge, a place to fly to.

Full. See Fill.

To Full.—Fuller. Lat. fullo, a fuller, a dresser of cloth. It. follare, to full or tuck woollen cloths, also to press or crowd ; folla, a throng or crowd. Fr. fouler, to tread or trample on ; fouler, to full, or thicken cloth in a mill. Du. vollen, to work and thicken cloth by stamping on it in a trough (called voll-kom), with water.—Kil. Pol. folować, to full ; folusz, a fuller. Serv. valyati (volutare), to roll about, to full cloth. Russ. val', a roller, cylinder ; valek', a washing beetle ; valyat', to roll, to throw down, to full cloth.

* Fulsome. Distasteful, loathsome, luscious.—B. The derivation from ON.

fullsa, to show disgust, must be given up, the earlier sense of the word being simply fulfilling, satisfying, then satiating, cloying, sickening.
Thann were spacli spices spended al aboute Pulsomdi at the fill to eche freke thereinne, And the wines tlierwith wich hem best lilted. William and the Werew. 1. 4324.
Fumadoes. Our pilchards salted and dried in the smoke are so called in Spain and Italy.—B. Transformed by the salt-fish dealers into Fairmaids.
To Fumble. To handle a thing awkwardly.—B. See Famble.
Fume. A smoke or steam. Lat. fumus, smoke. Hence to fume, to chafe with anger, from the strong breathing of anger. Wall. foumi sain pip, to smoke without pipe, to be out of temper.
* Fun. Sport, game ; to fun, to cheat, deceive.—Hal. OE. fon, Sw. fane. Da. dial. fun, a fool. To fon, to make a fool of, to make game of. ' Soyn shalle we fon hym.'—Towneley Myst., p. 94. ON. fána, to behave foolishly ; Sw. dial. fanta, fjanta, to play, sport, joke. The same connection of ideas is seen in Fr. fol, foolish; folatre, sportive. The court fool and jester was the same person.
-funct.—Function. Lat. fungor, functus, to discharge, fulfil an office, commission, &c. Defunctus vitâ, having done with life, dead.
Fundamental. — Fund. See To Found.
Funeral. Lat. funus, funeris, a dead body, the rites of burial.
Funk. 1. A strong rank smell as that of tobacco.—B. Properly an exhalation. Lang. fun, smoke.—Dict. Castr. Rouchi, funquer. Wall. funki, funker, to smoke, funqueron (fumeron), imperfectly burnt charcoal. Hence the metaphorical sense of perturbation, fright. In de fonk ziin (to be in a funk), in perturbatione esse.—Kil. ' Si commença a soi fumer (began to be disturbed), et couleur changier, et se douta de,' &c.—c. nouv. nouv. xli.
2. Touchwood. — Hal. Properly a spark, in the same way that spunk is used both for spark and touchwood. Funke, or lytylle fyre, igniculus.—Pr. Pm. Du. voncke, a spark ; voncke, vonck-hout, touchwood, tinder. G. funke, Bav. flunken, a spark, funkeln, to sparkle, from flunkern, flinkern, flinken, to glitter.
Funnel. 1. An implement for pouring liquids into a narrow orifice. Lat. infundibulum, Limousin enfounil, Bret. flounil, from fundere, to pour.
* 2. A chimney-pipe, from the resemblance to a funnel for pouring. It is remarkable that tunnel also is used in the two senses. Tonnell, to fill wine with, antonnoir. Tonnell of a chymney, tuyau.—Palsgr.
Fur. The proper meaning of the word is lining, and then the woolly skins of animals used for lining clothes, the coating of planks with which the side of a ship is lined, &c. It is a contracted form from fodder, which in all the languages of the Gothic stock is used in the double sense of food, and case or lining. To fodder a garment, to line it with cloth or skins.—Junius. Goth. fôdr, a sheath, OHG. fuotar, a sheath, and fodder for cattle ; ON. fôdr, sheath, lining ; Du. voeder, fodder, sheath, lining, fur ; voeyer, fodder, lining.—Kil. So in the Romance languages. It. fodero, fodder, sheath, lining ; Sp. forro, lining, sheathing.
The difficulty is to connect the two meanings by a natural transition. Fiorio regards the sense of victuals as the figurative one. ' Fodere, by metaphor used among soldiers for victuals or provant, serving as it were for a lining for their bodies.' The same figure occurs in the old song : ' Then line your worn doublet with ale, Gaffar Gray.'
But fodder in the sense of victuals is undoubtedly connected with food, while philologists are quite at a loss for any derivation of the word in the sense of a sheath ; and the act of putting food into the stomach might be taken as the type of stowing away, placing within a receptacle. Fr. fourrer, to put, thrust, or throw into, to lodge in, or hide within a hollow thing, hence to case, to sheath, to fur.—Cot.
* Furbelow. Fr. falbalas, Sp. farfalá, a flounce. Lyonnaise farbela, fringe, flounce, rag ; farbelousa, woman in rags, beggar. The meaning seems to be something flapping to and fro. Central Fr. friboler, barivoler, to flutter ; des rubans barivolants ; une robe qui barivole. It. farfalla, a butterfly, from its fluttering flight.
To Furbish. Fr. fourbir. It. forbire, to frub, furbish, burnish.—Fl. See Frub.
To Furl. Also to farthel—B.; farthelling lines, the lines used in furling. From tying up the sails in a fardel, or truss. Fr. fardeler, to truss, or pack up. The Fr. fresler, to furl, may be taken back again from E. furl.

Furlong. A furrow-long, the length of a furrow.
Furlough. Leave of absence given to a soldier. Du. *verlof*, leave, permission.
Furnace. Fr. *fournaise*, It. *fornace*, Lat. *furnus*, an oven.
To Furnish. It. *fornire*, to store with, provide unto, finish.—Fl. Fr. *enfourner*, to set in an oven, to begin, set in hand, set on work; *parfournir*, to perform, accomplish, fulfil, also to supply, furnish, make up.—Cot. The thorough baking of the loaf would thus seem to afford the type from whence *fornire* acquires the sense of finishing or completing. Lat. *furnus*, an oven. 'Ordine est qe leo turters ne dussent nul payn blaunk fayre ne *furmre*.'—Complaint of bakers of white bread, 15 Ed. II. Lib. Alb. 2, 413.
Furrow. As. *furh*, G. *furche*, Lat. *porca*.
Furze. Properly *firs*, from the prickly leaves common to the two kinds of plant. 'Fyrrys, or quice-tree, or gorstys-tree, *ruscus*. Fyre, sharp brush (*firre*, whyn), *saliunca*.'—Pr. Pm. Brosse, browzings for deer, also *fur-bushes*.—Fl.
To Fuse. -*fuse*. Lat. *fundo*, *fusum*, to pour, and thence to cast metal. *E. fuse*, to melt metal for casting, to melt or render liquid; *infusion*, a solution in liquid; *profuse*, lavish, pouring out; *confusion*, a pouring together, making indistinct.
*Fusee*.—Fuse. From Lat. *fusus*, a spindle, It. *fuso*, *fusolo*, a spindle or spool to spin with, also the shank or shaft of anything, as of a dart or candlestick, the shank of the leg, middle beam or post of a crane or a tent, axle of a millstone or of a wheel; Fr. *fuseau*, a spindle, spool, bobbin, axle of a grindstone; *fusée*, a spindlefull of thread, and from the resemblance of form, the *fusee* or conical wheel round which the chain winds; the barrel or axletree of a crane (Cot.). *Fusée* is also applied to certain pipe-shaped hollows, as the *fistula* of an abscess, the burrow of a fox, and it is under this aspect that the term is applied to a squib or rocket, a cylindrical case filled with wildfire. Hence the *fuse* or *fusee* of a bombshell, a pipe of slow burning powder used to ignite the charge. It. *fusolare*, to twirl or spin, to bore ordnance or wooden pipes, to make rockets or squibs.—Fl. Mod. Gr. *φυσέκη*, *φυσέγγιον*, a squib, cartridge, rocket.
Fusel oil. A fetid oil arising from potato spirit. G. dial. (Fallersleben) *fussein*, *fisseln*, to touch lightly with the fingers; Bav. *fuseln*, to trifle, dawdle, piddle, work hastily and ill; Tyrol *fuselerei*, *fuselwerk*, bad, useless work; *fuselobst*, poor, small fruit.—Deutsch. Mundart. vol. v. Bav. *fusel*, bad brandy, bad tobacco.
Fusil. Fr. *fusil*. It. *focile*, a fire steel for a tinder-box, then the hammer of a fire-lock, the fire-lock or gun itself. From Mid.Lat. *focus*, It. *fuoco*, Fr. *feu*, fire. 'E fu de kayloun *fert fusil* (a fire-iron):' the steel strikes fire from flint.—Bibelsworth.
Fuss. Swiss *pfusen*, to make a fizzing noise like wind and water in violent motion; *aufpfusen*, of the working of fermented liquors, metaphorically of one breaking out in a passion. Sw. *fias*, stir; *gora mycket fias*, to make a great stir; *fidska*, to fuss, to bustle, *faire l'affairé*, *l'empressé*, *être inutilement actif*. Dan. *fiasseri*, occupation with trifles.
Fustian. It. *fustagno*, Fr. *fustaine*. *Fusco-tincti*, *fustanie*.—Neccham. According to Diez, from being brought from Fostat or Fossat (Cairo) in Egypt.
*Fusty*. Fr. *fuste*, a cask, *fusté*, fusty, tasting of the cask, smelling of the vessel wherein it has been kept.—Cot. 'I mowlde or *fust* as corne or brede doth, *je moisis*.'—Palsgr. Then as it is only a mouldy, unclean cask which gives a taste to the liquor contained, *fusty*, mouldy; to *fust*, to grow mouldy—'the *fustiest* that ever corrupted in such an unswilled hogshead.'—Milton. 'I mowlde or *fust* as corne or brede doth, *je moisis*.'—Palsgr. From the similarity of sound the word has been confounded with *foisty* from a totally different origin.
-*fute*. Lat. *confuto*, to put to silence, confute, repress; *refuto*, to reject, refuse, defeat. The old explanation from the figure of pouring in a little cold water to suppress the boiling of a pot is not satisfactory. A rational foundation may be found in the interj. *phui*, *phu*, or *fu*, expressive of contempt and rejection. 'Phu! in *malam crucem*.'—Plaut. From corresponding forms of the interj. are G. *anpfuien*, to cry fie on, to hoot—Kütn.; Du. *verfoeyen*, *despuere*, *vilipendere*, *contemnere*, *respuere*—Kil.; N. *twia*, *twitta*, to express reprobation by the interj. *twi*!
Futile. Lat. *futilis* (from *fundo*, to pour), radically, apt to spill, leaky, what is easily spilt, fragile, and met. ineffectual, light, vain.
Futtocks. Not, as commonly explained, foot-hooks, but foot-stocks, as shown in Florio's explanation of the Italian term ; stamine, the upright ribs of the inside of a ship, called foot-stocks or foot-sticks.
Fuzz.—Fuzzy. G. pfuschen, Swiss pfusen, pfisen, E. fizz, represent the sound of water flying off from a hot surface, of air and water in intimate mixture and commotion. Hence fuzz, having the nature of things which fizz, a frothy, spongy mass, a confused mixture of air and water, as champagne foaming out of a bottle. Prussian fossen, fossern, to fuzz or break up into a fuzz or spongy mass of filaments. Fuzzy or fozy turnips (voose raepen—Kil.) are soft and spongy. A fuzzy outline is woolly and indistinct. Metaphorically to fuzz or fuzzle is to confuse the head with drink, to muddle with drink. 'The University troop dined with the Earl of Abingdon, and came back well fuzzed.'—Wood in Todd. See Fuddle.

Gab.—Gabble. Gabble represents a loud importunate chattering, as the cry of geese, rapid inarticulate talking.
Forthwith a hideous gabble rises loud Among the builders ; each to other calls, Not understood, till hoarse, and all in rage, As mocked they storm.—Milton.
In the same sense are used gabber (Jam), jabber, gibber. Then passing from the frequentative form (which in imitative words is often the original) we have gab, prating, fluent talking ; the gift of the gab, the gift of talking. Gab is also in Sc. and Dan. the mouth, the organ of speech. Pol. geba, the mouth.
The quotation from Milton shows the natural transition from the notion of talking without meaning to that of mockery, with which the idea of delusion and lying is closely connected. Du. gabberen, to joke, to trifle.—Kil. ON. gabba. It. gabbare, Fr. gaber, OE. gab, to mock, cheat, lie.
Gabel.—Gavel.—Gale. Gabel, a rent, custom, or duty.—B. It. gabella, a custom or imposition on goods ; Fr. gabelle, any kind of impost, but especially applied to the duty on salt. AS. gafol, gafel, tax, tribute, rent. Mid. Lat. gabulum, gablum, gaulum, rent, tax. 'Oxford. Hæc urbs reddebat pro theolonio et gablo regi, &c.'—Doomsday in Duc. 'Villam—et totum gaulum ejusdem villae.'—Charta Philippi Com. Flandr., A.D. 1176. The gaveller in the forest of Dean is the officer whose business is to collect the mining dues. The primary sense is doubtless rent paid for the tenure of land. Gael. gabh, take, receive, seize, hold, whence gabhail, seizing, taking, a lease, a tenure.—Armstrong. W. gafael, a hold, gripe, grasp. As the Gael. bh is often silent, gabhail becomes gale, still used for the taking of a mine in the West of England. To gale a mine, to acquire the right of working it—Hal. ; and gale is the common word in Ireland for a payment of rent, or for the rent due at a certain term.
Gaberdine. A shepherd's coarse frock or coat.—B. Fr. galvardine, galleverdine (Pat. de Champ.), It. gavardina, Sp. gabardina.
Gabion. A large basket used in fortification. It. gabbia, a cage ; gabbione, a great cage or gabion. See Gaol.
Gable. Goth. gibla, a pinnacle ; OHG. gibili, gipili, front, head, top ; G. giebel, the ridge or pointed end of a house ; ON. gafl, the sharp end of a thing, as the prow and poop of a boat, gable of a house.—Gudm. Da. gavl, gable.
The origin is probably preserved in Gael. gob, a beak, whence Manx gibbagh, sharp-pointed ; Pol. dziob, a beak, dziobat, to peck.
Gaby. A simpleton, one who gapes and stares with wonder. Da. gabe, to gape, gabe paa, to stare at. N. gapa, to gape, to stare, gap, a simpleton. So Fr. badault, a fool, dolt, ass, from the old form badare, to gape, to stare. Bret. genou, the mouth ; genaoui, to open the mouth like an idiot, to behave like a fool. E. dial. to gauve, to stare ; gauvy, a dunce ; gauvison, a young simpleton ; gaup, to gape or stare, gaups, a simpleton.—Hal.
Gad.—Goad.—Gadfly.—To Gad. Gad, a rod for fishing or measuring, pole, tall slender person.—Hal. 'A gadde or whip.'—Barct's Alv. Goad, an ell English.—B. Goth. gazd, OHG. gart, stimulus ; gardea, a rod, sceptre ; gertun, virgis, flagellis.—Graff.

The loss of the *r* in *gad* and *goad* (which differ only in the more or less broad pronunciation of the vowel) conceals the fundamental identity of the word with G. *gerte* and E. *yard*. The primitive meaning is a rod or switch, probably from the sound of a blow with such an implement. See *Gird*. Then, as a cut with a flexible rod, or prick with a pointed one, are equally efficient in urging an animal forwards, the name is extended to the implement used for either purpose, and a *goad* is the pointed rod used in driving bullocks. A further step in abstraction gives N. *gadd*, a prick, or sharp point. Da. dial. *gadd*, a prickle, thorn of a tree, sting of an insect. Hence E. *gad-fly*, the fly that goads or stings the cattle, and thence again the verb to *gad*, to go restlessly about, as cattle flying from the attack of the *gadfly*.
A fierce loud buzzing breeze, their stings draw blood, And drive the cattle *gadding* through the wood. Dryden.
So from It. *asilo*, *assillo*, a gadfly, a goad, *assilare*, to be bitten with a horsefly, to leap and skip as an ox or a horse bitten by flies, to be wild or raging.—Fl.
Gaff.—Gaffle. These terms and their equivalents in the related languages are applied to different kinds of hooked or forked instruments, which are classed under a common name from their aptitude in seizing or holding fast. The origin is preserved in Gael. *gabh*, take, seize, whence *gabhlach*, forked; *gobhar*, a fork, a prop; Ir. *gobhlog*, a hay fork, a forked support for a house. W. *gafael*, a hold, gripe, grasp; *gafl*, a fork; *gaflach*, a fork, a lance. Lang. *gafa*, to take, to seize; *gaf*, gain, profit, also a hook. Sp. *gafar*, to hook; *gafa*, the gaffle or hooked lever by which a crossbow was drawn up, hooks for lowering casks. Dan. *gaffel*, a fork, and nautically the gaff or prop used in extending the upper corner of a fore-and-aft sail, originally doubtless provided with a fork at the lower end, with which it embraced and slid on the mast. *Gaffle*, a dung-fork.—Hal. G. *gabel*, a fork; *fleisch-gabel*, a flesh-fork, flesh-hook; *gabeln der weinreben*, the tendrils of vines by which they lay hold of the support; *gabel-anker*, a cramp-iron in architecture. Lith. *kabe*, *kabele*, a hook; *kablys*, a hook, snag, crooked fork.

\*Gaffer*.—Gammer.
A designation of elderly people in humble life. From grandfather, grandmother, cut down in the W. of E. to *gramfer*, *grammer*.—Jennings. The Fris. *faer* for father.—Outzen. Fin. *fari* (from the Norse), father, grandfather, venerable old man. N. *moir*, *mor*, *moi*, mother; *gummor*, *glimmer*, *gumma*, grandmother.

Gag.
The inarticulate noises made by one endeavouring to speak, while suffering impediments either from the imperfection of his own organs or from external violence, are represented by the syllables *gag*, *gag*. Swiss *gaggen*, *gagseii*, to stutter, speak in an incoherent manner; Bret. *gagel*, *gagoula*, to stutter, gabble; Gael. *gagach*, stuttering. E. *gag* is to cause one to make inarticulate guttural noises, either by stopping the mouth or external pressure. *Gaggyn*, to streyne by the throte, suffoco.—Pr. Pm. Banff. *glag*, *glagger*, to make a noise in the throat as if choking.

Gage.
Gr. *gage*, a pledge. See *Wage*.

Gag-tooth.
A projecting tooth.—Hal. ON. *gagr*, prominent. See *Goggle*.

Gail-clear. — Gyle-tub.
*Gail-clear*, *gail-fat*, a wort-tub; *guile* (of ale or beer), a brewing.—B. *Gail-dish*, a vessel used in brewing; *gyle-tub*, the vessel in which the ale is worked. N. *gil*, ale in a state of fermentation; *gil-kar*, *gil-saa*, the tub in which the wort ferments. Du. *ghijlen*, to boil, to effervesce; *gyl*, *gyl-bier*, beer in which the fermentation is going on. *T' bier staat in't gijl*, the beer ferments.—Halma.

Gain.
1. It. *guadagnare*, to gain; Prov. *guazanh*, *gazanh*, *gaanh*, gain, profit; OFr. *gaagner*, Fr. *gagner*, to gain. The primary meaning of the word seems to be labour, from whence to the idea of gain the transition is obvious, in accordance with the primeval warning. In the sweat of thy brow thou shalt gain thy bread. OFr. *gaagner*, to till the ground, labour in one's calling.—Roquefort. *Gaigneur*, a husbandman, labourer.—Cot. In the same way N. *vinna*, to labour, and also to win or gain. Walach. *loucrare*, to work, do, complete; *loucrou*, labour, work, thing; Lat. *lucrum*, gain. The ultimate origin of the word is to be found in the biblical metaphor by which children are compared to branches. Gael. *gas*, a bough, a young boy; *gasan*, a little branch, young man. Then, as in the case of Lat. *puer*, we pass from the sense of boy to that of servant. W. *gwas*, *gwasan*, a youth, a servant, *gwasanaeth*, service; Bret. *gwaz*, a man, vassal, servant; Prov. *guazan*, a vassal, *guasandor*, a cultivator.

A singular agreement is seen between the Prov. forms and Turk. gazanj, kazanj, gain, profit, earnings; gazanmek, kazanmek, to gain, to earn. The puzzle is augmented by the ON. gagn, gain, profit, victory; at gagna, gagnaz, to profit, to avail, which must be traced to a totally different origin from Fr. gagner, notwithstanding the striking identity both in form and meaning.

Gain. 2. Gain (in composition) is G. gegen, against, ON. gegn, gagn, against, through; in composition, thoroughly, as well as opposite, opposed to; Dan. gien, Sw. gen, gain, in return; Bret. gin, opposite; ann tu gin, the opposite side; gin-ouch-gin, directly opposite, explaining the reduplicate form of G. gegen, N. gegn, E. gain.
The sense of opposite readily melts into that of direct, immediate, as the object opposite is that with which we are in immediate contact. Hence Sw. gen, gin, direct, short; genaste wägen, the shortest way, E. dial. the gainest way. Sw. genast, directly, immediately; gent emot, gent öfwer, over against, directly opposite; genväg, Dan. gienvei, a short cut, way leading directly through any intervening obstacle, whence may be explained the sense of through, belonging to ON. gagn, gegnom, gegnt, Sw. genom, &c. It is difficult to separate the foregoing from Du. ghene, yon; ghender, ghinder, yonder; ginds, out there, by which the attention of the hearer is directed to a certain object. The speaker pronounces a word signifying 'opposite,' 'before your eyes,' while he indicates the object intended by a bodily gesture. AS. gean, geon, gain (in composition), again; geond, through, over, as far as, beyond. Geond to tham stane, up to the stone. Hider and geond, hither and thither. Geond feowertig daga, after forty days. Fram geondan sæ, from beyond sea. The effect of the syllable geon is to indicate a position in time or space, separated from the speaker by an interval of forty days, an expanse of sea, &c.

Gain. 3. Gainly. Sc. to gane, or gain, to belong to, to last, to suffice; to be fit or suitable.
For I brought as much white monie As gane my men and me.—Border Minstrelsy.
The coat does na gane him, does not fit him. A ganand price, a fit or becoming price. Gain, gane, fit, useful, direct.—Jam. Gain applied to things, is convenient; to persons, active, expert; to a way, short.—Ray. Gainly in like senses is out of use, but we still have ungainly, awkward, unhandy.
The immediate origin is ON. gegn, convenient, suitable, gegna, properly to meet, then to answer, to fit, to suit. N. gjegna, to meet, to set oneself against, turn one's back, also to be fitting or suitable. Datta kann ikje gjegna, that will not do, will not answer.—Aasen.

Gait. See Gate.

Gaiter. Fr. guestre, guêtre; Bret. gweltren, geltren.

Gala.—Regale. It. far gala, to be merry, to eat and drink well; regalare, to feast, or entertain; vestirse di gala, to dress fine and gay; gala, ornament, finery, dress. Sp. dia di gala, a court day, holiday. OFr. gale, good cheer, jollity; galer, to lead a joyous life.—Roquef.
The origin is the metaphor by which a person in a state of enjoyment is compared to one swimming in an abundance of good things, of which he can take at pleasure.
I bathed still in bliss, I led a lordly life. Gascoigne.
Long thus he lived, slumbering in sweet delight Bathing in liquid joys his melted sprite. Spenser, Britain's Ida.
Copenhagen is represented in the Danish papers as swimming in a flood of delight.—Times, Sept. 9, 1865.
It. guazzare, to wade, dabble, plash; by met. to lavish in good cheer; guazzettare, to wallow in good cheer, to love to fare daintily.—Fl.
Now It. gala signifies a bubble (see Gall); andare a gala, galare, galleggiare, to float; galleggiare nel giubilo, as Fr. nager dans la joie, to give oneself up to pleasure. So also dim. galluzza, gallozzo, a water bubble, galluzzare, to float as a bubble, to be in a high state of enjoyment. By this not very obvious train of thought, gala, a bubble, is taken as the type of festivity and enjoyment.

Galaxy. Gr. γάλα γάλακτος, milk, γαλαξίας κύκλος, Lat. galaxias, the milky way.

Gale. Sc. gale-wind, gall-wind, a gale, strong wind.—Jam. From N. galen, angry, mad, raging. Ein galen storm, eit gale ver, a furious storm.
The original figure may perhaps be bewitched, foul weather got up by witchcraft, from ON. gala, to sing, at gala galdra, to recite charms; galinn, bewitched, beside oneself, mad. Galdr, charms, witchcraft, is a derivative from the same root, properly signifying song, as shown in hanagaldr, cockcrow. Hence galdra-hrið, storm brought on by witchcraft.
To Gale. To cry, make an outcry.
Now tellith forth and let the sompnour gale. Chaucer.
ON. gala, to sing, to crow, exhibits the origin of Lat. gallus, a cock, as well as of nightingale, the bird that sings by night. Dan. hanegal, cock-crow.
Gall. 1. AS. gealla, from the yellow colour. G. galle, gall; gelb, yellow; Pol. żołć, gall; żołty, yellow; żołcić, to make yellow; Bohem. žluč, gall; żłuty, yellow.
Perhaps however the derivation may run in the opposite direction, as Lat. fulvus, yellow, seems derived from fel, gall.
Gall. 2.—Wind-gall.—Gall-nut. G. gall-appel, an oak-apple, the light, round, nut-like excrescence produced by insects on different kinds of oak, and used for ink, or in dyeing.
It. gala, galla, gallozza, galluzza, an oak-gall. The original meaning is a bubble, from the guggling sound of boiling or bubbling water. This sound is represented in Piedmontese by gogala, as in E. by guggle; gogala, the bubbling up of boiling water, or simply a water-bubble.
—Zalli. Valencian, bull à galls, it boils in bubbles.—Dozy. Arab. gald, to boil.
Gael. goil, to boil; Sc. guller, or buller, for the gurgling sound of water rushing through a confined opening, belong to the same imitative class.
The It. diminutives galluzza, gallozza, are commonly used in the sense of a water-bubble, but the simple form of the noun is used in the same sense in the expression andare a gala, stare a gala, to float on the water.
Then, as in other cases, where a bubble is taken as the type of globular form, the designation is transferred to a ball, round lump, and especially to an oak-gall, from its singular lightness, floating on the water like a bubble. Pol. gała, gałeczka, gałka, a ball; gałka muszkatałowa, a nutmeg; galas, a gall-nut; Bohem. halka, a knob, dubowa halka, an oak-gall (dubowa, oak); Lith. galwa, head, boll of flax, &c., the dim. of which, galwuze, is nearly identical with It. galluzza.
Russ. galushka, a dumpling, lump of meal; Walach. gałka, a gland, kernel in the throat. Sp. galla, agalla, oak-gall, gland in the throat, wind-gall, or elastic tumour in a horse's leg.
Gall. 3. To gall, to make a sore place, to rub off the skin. Fr. galler, to gall, fret, itch, also to rub, scratch where it itcheth; galle, an itching of the skin, dry scab or scurf.—Cot.
It. galla, mange, scab.
In w. gwall, ON. galli, the word has the more general sense of a fault or imperfection; galladr, having some fault; Sw. galen, faulty, bad, wrong. Rätt eller galet, right or wrong. Dan. gal, wrong, ill, and provincially sore. Min fod er gal, my foot is galled or sore. E. dial. gall, a fault or imperfection, spring, or wet place in a field, bare place in a crop, a sore place.—Hal.
As under Bale we ventured the suggestion that a boil or botch (ON. bola, a bubble, blister, boil) was taken as the type of bodily illness, and thence of suffering and evil in general, so the possibility of a like origin for gall in the sense of evil may be supported by the Piedm. gogala, a bubble, gogala, gola, a bump raised by a blow, often confounded with a boil or blain.
This word is used mainly in two senses, 1st, with the accent on the first syllable, showy in dress, spirited, brave in action, and 2nd, with the accent on the second syllable, attentive to women. They may perhaps have different origins.
The first of these senses is undoubtedly from It. galano, quaint and gay in clothes, brave and gallant in new fashions and bravery; galante, brave, handsome, quaint, comely, gallant to the sight.—Fl. Gallaunt, a man fresh in apparel.—Palsgr. in Way. The origin is gala, a state of festivity or enjoyment, of which the derivative galano would naturally be applied as well to the gayness of apparel as to the high spirits characteristic of festivity.
It will be observed that brave was formerly used in the sense of handsomeness of dress, though now, like gallant, applied to spirited action.
As a person courting a woman is naturally attentive to dress, the second of the senses above mentioned may be an incidental application of the first. Sp. galán, gay, neat, well-dressed, lively, courtly, especially with respect to ladies, a gentleman in full dress, courtier, lover, wooer.
It is possible however that the double form of the It. galano and galante may arise from confusion of a different word, the equivalent of Sc. callan, callant, a youth.
And eik ane hundreth followis redy boun Of young gallandis with purpure crestis rede, Thare giltin gere made glittering every stede. D.V.
Gael. gallan, a branch, a youth, tall or handsome young man. Pol. gałąź, Ptg. galho, Sp. gajo, a branch, shoot. The designation of a youth on the same prin-ciple from comparison to a branch is also seen in Gael. ogan, a branch or twig, a young man; oas, a stalk, bough, boy. See Gain.

Gallery. The ordinary E. sense of a balcony or upper stage within an apart-ment, a place where the occupier is de-fended by rails from falling, seems the original one. Lang, galarié, the rails of a staircase, balustrade or parapet, terrace before a house. As access to the differ-ent apartments of a house was commonly given by a passage thus constructed, the term was transferred to any passage or long apartment. Sw. galler, lattice, balustrade; galler-fönstr, a lattice window, jalousie, blind. Possibly from an equivalent of Gael. gallan, Ptg. galho, a branch, rod, shoot.

Galley. ON. galleyta, OSw. galeida, galeja, Mid.Lat. galeida, galea. It. gal-lera, a galley; galleone, a galleon or great galley; galleotta, a handsome big galley—Fr., a galliot. Galleys are explained by William of Tyre naves rostratæ, and Dan. gallion is the beak of a ship. Lith. gala, end, point, tip.

Galliard.—Goliard. Fr. gaillard, lusty, frolick, jocund, gamesome, also rash, or somewhat indiscreet by too much jollity.—Cot. The primary type of jollity is eating and drinking, an idea expressed in caricature by a representation of the sound of liquor pouring down the throat. Swiss gudeln, guddeln, godeln, to shake liquids in a vessel; gudeln, gudern, gut-teln, gutzeln, to guggle or pour out of a narrow-necked vessel with a gurgling noise. Hence Fr. godailler, It. gozzavigliare, to guzzle, tipple, to make good cheer. In the same way from the same sound, as represented by Piedm. gogala, bubble, boiling of water, E. guggle, is pro-duced Swiss guggeln, to tipple; frölich und gögel—Hans Sachs; Fr. gogaille, merrymaking, frolic; faire gogaille, to make merry, to drink merrily. From the former half of this word is formed gogues, jollity; être en ses gogues, to be frolick, lusty, in a merry mood; goguer, gogayer, to make good cheer, take his pleasure; while the latter half seems to give rise to the term gaillard, one making merry, en-joying himself, a good fellow. The word is closely allied in form and meaning with the OE. goliard, a loose companion, from Fr. goulard, goliard, a gully-gut, greedy feeder—Cot.; bouffon, glouton, mauvais sujet; goulardise, rail-lerie, plaisanterie—Roquef.; goulu, glut-tonous; goulée, a mouthful; Lat. gula, the throat, gluttony; gulo, a glutton; all originally from the sound of liquid pour-ing down the throat. See Gala, where the idea of merrymaking is deduced from the same radical image by a different figure.

Galligaskins. Fr. Greguesque, Greek; chausses à la Garguesque, gregs or gallo-gaskins; greguesques, slops, gregs, gallo-gascoines, venitians; gregues, wide slops, gallogascoins, great Gascon or Spanish hose.—Cot. The reference to Gascon is a piece of mistaken etymology. The word is simply a corruption of Gregues-ques, Grecians. Greguesque, garguesque, galguesque, galligaskes.

Gallimawfry. Fr. gallimafrie, a hodge-podge, dish made of remnants chopped up. Probably lengthened out from a form like glamafrée, or glamfrée, representing a confused sound, analo-gous to Sc. clamjamfry, nonsensical talk, trumpery, tag-rag-and-bobtail. Gael. glam, bawl, cry out; glamaineachd, con-tinued babbling, making a noise; clam-ras, clamhras, brawling.

Gallinaceous. Lat. gallina, a hen.

Gallipot.—Galley-tile. Du. gley, clay; gley-pot, earthen pot, vessel of earthenware, galli-pot. So galley-tile, an earthenware tile. About the year 1570, I. Andries and I. Jan-son, potters, came from Antwerp and settled in Norwich, where they followed their trade, making galley-tiles and apothecaries vessels [gallipots]—Stow.

Gallon. Fr. jalle, jaille, jale, jalée, an earthen jar, bowl, tub. This must have been pronounced in some dialects gale, the hard and soft g frequently inter-changing, as in galet and jalet, a pebble, gambe and jambe, a leg, E. garden, and Fr. jardin, &c. The evidence of such a change in the present instance is left in galot, a pitcher—Hécart; OFr. galon, a gallon; galoie, identical with jalaie, a measure of wine, a soe, a tub.—Cot. Gallon is also written jalon in Fleta, 'Pondus octo librarum frumenti facit mensuram jalonis, et 8 jalonatæ frumenti faciunt bussellum.'—Duc. The original sense of the simple word seems to have been a bowl; jale de cervoise, a bowl of ale; and we learn from Carpentier that it was also applied to a solid bowl or ball. ' Le jeu de boules que l'on nomme (en Boulenois) le jeu de jales.'—A.D. 1453. If then we were formerly right in tracing bowl or boll to bulla, a bubble, it is probable that jale or gale, a bowl, must be identified with Pol. gala, galka, a ball, It. gala, a bubble, an oak-gall. See Gall, Gafci. The Fr. gal, galet, or jalet, a peb-ble, a little round stone, galet, a cake (a round lump of dough), are other applica-tions of the same root.

Galloon. We have, under Gala, traced the process by which that word came to signify festivity. Hence it was in It. transferred to the ornaments of a festive occasion, such puffs, knots, or roses of lawn or tiffany, or ribbons, as women wear on their heads and breasts—Florio ; ' now-a-days used,' he adds, ' for all manner of gallantness or garish-ness in ornaments and apparel that is fair to look on and yet not costly.' In French the derivatives galon, galant are used in the same sense. Galonner les cheveux, to deck the hair, to ornament it with lace or ribbons ; galender, orner, couronner.—Pat. de Champ. Ribbons used to ornament the hair or dress were called galon, or galant.—Trevoux. At a later period the term was appropriated to gold or silver lace, the most showy mate-rial of which such ornaments were made, and hence E. galloon.

Gallop. Fr. gallopper; Fland. waloppe, vliegh-waloppe, a gallop.—Kil. E. dial. wallop, gallop. The name is taken from the sound made by a horse gallop-ing compared to the walloping or boiling of a pot. So natural is the comparison that it is taken in the converse order to express a complete state of ebullition, when the bubbles are thrown up in rapid succession and the pot is said to boil a gallop. ' Rien que de l'entendre galoper dans le poêle on comprenait qu'il gelait à pierre.'—Le Blocus

To Gallow.—Gally. To terrify. AS. agalwan, agallan. Tha wearth ic agelwed and swithe afeared. Then was I terrified and sore afeared.—Boethius.

Gallows. Goth. galga, ON. galgi, OHG. galgo, cross, execution-tree, gallows. As the earliest gallows would be the branch of a tree the word has been con-nected with Pol. galąź, Boh. haluz, Magy. gally, Gael. gallan, a branch. So in the Salic law, ad ramum incrocare, to hang ; ramatus, hanged. Pol. Na galezi złodzieja ! to the (bough) gallows with the thief ! We have the same expression in the Kentish proverb. The father to the bough, the son to the plough. Another origin of the word may be suggested in the Russ. glagol, the letter r (so called from being the first letter of glagol, a word), and from the form of the letter, a gibbet or crane. Braces are in some parts of England called gallows, as in G. (Fallersleben) hängels, as the implement by which the trousers hang.

Galosh.—Galage. Originally a wooden sole fastened by a strap to the foot. Solea, a shoe called a galage or paten, which hath nothing on the fote but only la-chettes.—Elyot in Way. Galache, ga-legge, galoche, undersolynge of mannys fote, crepita.—Pr. Pm. A corruption of E. clog (gloc, a log—Pat. de Champ.), or the equivalent Fr. clague, a kind of clog or patten worn in wet and dirt (Gattel), the pronunciation being softened by the insertion of an a between the g and l, as in galley-pot, from gley-pot, and in other cases. In the same way from G. klots, a log, ' cloczen, calotzchen, vel fuss-solchen qui induuntur in hyeme (Mod.G. klotz-schuh), crepida.'—Dief. Supp. The Mid. Lat. calopodium seems formed in the same way from Du. klopper, a clog, with a blundering introduction of the Gr. pod, foot. Calopodium, holz-schuoch, klompe. Calopifex, holz-schumacher.—Dief. Supp.

Gamashes.—Gambadoes. From W. gar, the shank, is Lang. garamacho, a legging, and thence (rather than from It. gamba, the leg). It. gamascie (for gramas-cie, as Sc. gramashes—Jam.), Fr. ga-maches, E. gamashes, spatterdashes. The corruption to gambages probably took effect under the supposition of a deriva-tion from Fr. jambe, It. gambe. A further corruption converted gambages into gam-badoes.

Gambison. OFr. gamboison, gambe-son, wambais, a wadded coat or frock worn under a coat of mail or sometimes alone, as armour of defence. Armati re-putabantur qui galeas ferreas in capitibus habebant et qui wambasia, id est tunicam spissam ex lino et stuppa et veteribus pannis consutam, &c.—Chron. de Colmar in Dict. Etym. G. wamms, a doublet. Commonly derived from ohg. wamia, the wame or belly, as signifying a defence for the belly ; but this explanation is founded on too narrow a meaning of the word, which was applied to other wadded structures as well as a body-coat. Ray-mond des Agiles in his history of the siege of Jerusalem mentions that the walls were protected against the machines of the besiegers by mattresses, ' culcitra de gambasio.' In a bull of Innocent IV. the name is given to a wadded rug. ' Abbates quoque in dormitorio cum aliis super wambasios jaceant.'—'Tunicas gambesa-tas sive gambesones,' 'Une selle-gam-boisie.'—Carp. 'Cotes, houppelandes gamboisies.'—Duc. The word is in fact a simple adoption of the Gr. βαμβάκιον or βαμβάκινον, a fabric stuffed with cotton, the Gr. β, pro-nounced like a v, being rendered in the Western languages sometimes by b and sometimes by w, passing into g. The latter mode of writing gave rise to wam-basia, gambeso, and similar forms, while the former produced It. bambasina, bam-bacina, any bumbaste in stuff or cloth (i. e. any stuff wadded with bumbaste or cotton).—Fl. Now bombicinium, like gamboison, was specially applied to a wadded jacket. 'Bombicinium, pourpoin vel aqueton,—pourpoinz fait de coton.'—Gloss. in Carp. 'Ab hoc nomine quod est bumbace dicitur bumbacinum, quod est gallice pourpoinz.'—John de Garlandia. It should be observed that the synon-ymous hacqueton, Fr. auqueton, hoqueton, Prov. alcoto, is named in the same way from the cotton with which it is stuffed. Even without reference to the ambigu-ous nature of the Gr. β, an initial b and g often interchange, as Fr. busart, Prov. gusart, a buzzard; G. belfern and gelfern, to bellow; Sp. bazofia and gazofia, offal; Sc. buller and guller, to make a bub-bling sound.

Gamble.—Gambol.—Game. It is impossible to separate these words, al-though gambol has probably come through a French channel, and gamble from a Saxon ancestry. The radical image is that of a sudden and rapid movement to and fro, jumping, springing; then the state of excited spirits which spends itself in muscular exertion, and is witnessed by such expres-sions as G. vor freuden hüpfen, E. to jump for joy. Thus the expression for jumping is applied to joy, sport, merrymaking, amusement, and as the two main resources of amusement in an uncultivated state of society are the pursuit of wild animals, and the indulgence of the passion for gain, afforded by the staking of valuables on concerted issues of skill or hazard, the name of sport or game is emphatically given to these two kinds of pastime, the term game, in the case of the chase, being accidentally confined to the object of pursuit.

The root kip, gip, gib, in the sense of a sudden movement, is widely spread. W. cip, ysgip, a sudden snatch, pull, or effort; Gael. sgiab, a quick or sudden movement, snatch, or pull; E. skip, a sudden jump, a word intimately connected with the idea of sportfulness and play. Then all their gladness doth begin, And then their skips and then their play; So falls their sadness all away. Uncertain Authors in R. Again we have E. gib, or jib, to start suddenly backwards; OFr. regiber, to wince or kick; giber, se debattre des pieds et des mains, s'agiter, lutter—Roquef., to play—Pat. de Champ.; degi-bier, agitare se festive, oblectare se; gibder, giboyer, to play or sport. 'Et quant le enfes fu venuz de gibeier et de jouer.'—Duc. Then as hawking was for-merly the sport par excellence of gentle-men, the term was chiefly applied to that exercise, and the modern gibier, while it has ceased to signify the actual pursuit, is used, as E. game, to designate the pro-duce of the chase. The nasalisation of the vowel in the modern regimber, to kick, brings us nearer our principal mark. Lang. ghimba, to jump; jhimbela, to tumble; Da. dial. gimpe, to rock, to swing. Sw. guppa, to rock or pitch, to tilt or strike up, and with the nasal, Dan. gumpa, skumpe, to jog, to jolt. Swiss gampen, to rock, to see-saw; gampiross, a rocking-horse; gamp-brun-nen, a draw-well; gämpfen, to shake or joggle; gumpen, to jump. Bav. gampen, gumpen, to jump, hop, sport. 'Mit e' lar'n wampm is net gued gampen.' It is hard to be merry with an empty belly. Gämel, mirth, sport, enjoyment; gäm-liche leute, gumpellüte, persons diverting themselves or others, gamblers, players. 'Die gumpellüte, gyger und tamburer:'—players, fiddlers, and tabourers. 'Loter und gumpellüte:'—idlepacks and merry-makers.—Schm. Swiss gammel, merry-making, noisy enjoyment; gammeln, to make merry, sport, romp; gammler, merrymakers. The Swiss and Bav. forms are obviously identical with E. gamblers, properly merrymakers, but used in a bad sense. The simple form game is found in OFris. in the sense of joy. 'Alsa dede God use hera ena grata gama:'—thus God our Lord did us a great joy.—Richt-hofen. AS. gaman, merrymaking, sport. Sw. gamman, joy. The Fr. gambiller, to leap, dance, limp—Roquef., is essentially the same word with E. gamble, but used in the original instead of the figurative sense. It is always supposed, very naturally, to be derived from It. gamba, Fr. jambe, the leg, and there can be no doubt of the di-rect relation between the two, but the connection through the Lang. *jhimbela, to tumble, ghimba, to jump, with Fr. re-gimber, regiber, to kick, and E. gib, shows that the derivation must lie in the oppo-site direction. In the same way from Fr. giguer, to run, jump, skip, "E. jig (a closely-allied root with the foregoing jib), is formed gigue, gige, the thigh; from gigoter, to shake one's legs, jump about—Boyer, gigot, a leg of mutton.

Even It. gambata (Fr. gambade, OE. gambaud, gambauld, gambold, gambol) is probably direct from an equivalent of the Bav. gampen, to jump, and not from gamba. Gambade, a gambol, yew-game, tumbling trick.—Cot.

Gammon. 1. A vulgar exclamation signifying nonsense! you are joking! Obviously identical with Dan. gammen, sport; and singularly enough the word is used interjectionally in Fris. precisely as in E., although not preserved in the for-mer language in the sense of sport. Gammen! interjection of contempt.—Epkema. See Gamble. It. gamba! is also used for tush! pish! in mockery, to signify that one is very far from the mark in what he is saying.—Fl.

2. It. gamba, a leg; gambone, any great leg, thigh, giget, gammon or pestle, viz. of a beast.—Fl. Fr. jambon, a gammon—Cot.; a ham or thigh of cured pork.

The It. gamba is commonly derived from W., Gael. cam. It. ghembo, crooked, Fr. gambir, to crook; but crookedness does not seem a likely characteristic from whence to take the designation of a limb like the leg. It would rather be named from its most energetic action, jumping or springing; Bav. gampen, gumpen, to jump or spring.—Schm. See Gambol.

Gamut.—Gamma. Fr. gamme, the musical scale. Said to be derived from gamma, the Greek name of the letter G, used in denoting the notes of the scale, but the accounts of the reason why this letter was adopted for the purpose are confused and contradictory, and why the Greek name should have been used at all is not explained. The real origin is in all probability the Fr. game or gamme, a chime of bells, which would supply the most familiar example of the musical scale. 'I chyme as a chyme doth at a certayne houre. Je sonne la gamme.'—Palsgr. The addition of the final ut in gamut arose from the use of that syllable to mark the first note of the scale.

The ultimate origin is the representation of a clanging sound by the syllable glam, gam, or the like. N. glam, clang; glamhul, window in a belfry to allow the sound to spread; It. gaume, the shrill-sounding note of a huntsman—Fl.; Esthon. kummama. Fin. kommata, Gr. κoμίζω, to clang; It. campana, a bell.

To Ganch. A way of executing malefactors by throwing them from a height on a sharp stake or hook. Turk. kanja. It. gancio, a hook; inganzare, to torture in the Turkish fashion.—Fl.

Gander.—Goose. G. gans, ganserich; PLD. goos, gante; Du. ganse, ganser, or ganserick; Pol. gęś, gęsior, goose and gander respectively. Lat. anser, Gr. χήν, goose. Lith. guz! guz! cry to call geese.

Gang. See Go.

Gangrene. Gr. γάγγραινα, whence Lat.

Gannet. The Solan goose. AS. ganota; the wild-goose; ganotes bath, the sea. The application to a particular species; as the Solan goose, is a modern refine-ment. 'Habuit etiam beatus Leudomirus culturam saepe ab avibus, qui Ganitæ vocantur, depastam.'—Carp. It is cer-tain that no damage was ever done to corn by Solan geese.

Gantlet.—Gauntlet. Fr. gantelet, an iron glove; gant, It. guanto, ON. vöttr, a glove. In the phrase to run the gauntlet the word is a corruption of gantelope, arising from the possibility of thus giving meaning to the term in E. ears, under the supposition that the punishment consisted in a blow from the gauntleted hand of each of a lane of soldiers through which the criminal was made to pass. But the blow was always given with a rod, as appears in the G. durch die spiess-ruthen laufen (spitz- or spiess-ruthe, a switch); Fr. passer par les verges. To run the gantlet or gantelope, to run through a company of soldiers standing on each side, making a lane, with each a switch in his hand to scourge the criminal.—B. ON. gata, a lane; gata gera, skapa einum gátu, to make one run the gantlet.—Fritzner. The punishment was probably made known to us from the wars of Gustavus Adolphus, as the expression is pure Swedish; löpa gatlopp, from *gata, a street, or, in military language, a line of soldiers, and lopp, course.

Gaol. It. gabbia, gaiola (Lat. gabbiola), a cage; Sp. gavia, a cell for mad persons; gayola, jaula, a cage, a cell for mad persons; Fr. geole, a cage for birds, a gaol or prison. Lat. cavea, a cage. The origin seems Gael. gabh, to take, seize, make prisoner, hold or contain; gabhar, a gaol.—Armstrong. Ir. gabhail, to take, make prisoner, bind in fetters; gabhann, a gaol, a pound for cattle.

To Gape.—Gap. It may be doubtful whether the more complete form of the word be not glape, in accordance with G. glaffen, compared with gaffen, to gape, to stare; ON. glapa, to stare; gapa, to gape; N. glap, gap, a gap or passage. E. dial. glop, to stare.—Hal. Evidence of the fuller form remains in Chaucer's galp, corresponding to glap as E. yelp to Fr. glapir, or as N. pilka to the synonymous plikka, to pluck. See Gare. Pol. gapić się, to gape.

To Gar. To make one do a thing. ON. gera, gora, to make or do. Bret. gra, do, affair, business.

Garb. Formerly applied to the mode of doing anything, but latterly confined to the fashion of dress. 'The garb and fashion of his conversation,'—Scott in R. Sp., Cat. garbo, grace, air with which a thing is done; It. garbo, comeliness, behaviour, carriage—Altieri; Fr. garbe, gracefulness, good fashion.—Cot. The primary meaning is simply fashion, the make or shape of a thing, then the right shape, agreeable fashion. The primary sense is preserved in It. garbo, garbatura, the curvature or make of a thing; garbato di nave, the model of a ship. OHG. Garawi, ornament, preparation, dress, habitus, cultus; wibgarawi, mundus muliebris, feminine habiliments; wiggarawi, habiliments of war; garawjan, to prepare; AS. gearwa, preparation, clothing, gear.

Garbage. Refuse, waste. 'Tara, the tare, waste, or garbisch of any ware or merchandise.'—Fl. The guts of an animal killed for food.

To Garble. To cleanse from dross and dust. Sp. garbillo, a coarse sieve; garbillare, to garble, to sift, to separate the bad from the good.—Neum. Garbled evidence is when we select what suits our purpose and suppress the rest. Venet. garbelo, Sp. garbillo, Arab. alghirbal, algarbal, Ptg. alvarral (Dozy), a sieve. On the other hand the word may be from It. crivello, crivo, Lat. cribrum, a sieve. There is so much analogy between the processes of sifting and combing that we may confidently connect the foregoing forms with W. crib, a comb, a wool-card; cribin, a hay-rake; Bret. cribin, a heckle or toothed instrument for dressing flax; cribel, a cock's-comb; scrivel, a curry-comb; Bohem. hřeb, a nail; hřeben, Pol. grzebien, a comb. The radical image is shown in Pol. grzebać, to scratch; Gael. sgriob, to scrape, scratch, curry, agreeing with the foregoing forms with a thin vowel; while W. crafu, to scrape or scratch (giving rise to crafell, ysgrafell, a curry-comb), more exactly accounts for those with a broad vowel, like It. garbellare, to sift, or Lat. carminare, to card wool.

Garboil. It. garbuglio, embroilment, confusion; Fr. garbouil, hurliburly, great stir, horrible rumbling.—Cot. The word is originally framed to represent the dashing of water, lying midway between Fr. gargouille, a water-bubble, and barbouiller, to blot, bedash all over, to jumble, confound, mingle ill-favouredly; It. barboglio, a tumultuous hurlyburly, any confused or clattering noise. In imitative words of this nature an initial b and g interchange with great facility. Lang. gargala as well as barbala, to boil. Grisons, garbugliar, inbarbugliar, to confuse, entangle; garbugl, barbugl, confusion.

Garden. It. giardino, Fr. jardin, G. garten, Du. gaerde, a garden. Bav. der garten, OHG. garto, a garden, yard, inclosed place. Holzgarten, wood-yard; scefgartun (navalibus), ship-yard; hopfengarten, hop-garden, hop-yard. See Yard.

To Gare.—Gaure.—Garish.—Gaze. OE. gare or gaure, to stare; whence garish, staring, glaring, showy. With fifty garing heads a monstrous dragon stands upright.—Phaer in R. Doun fro the castel cometh ther many a wight To gaurin on this ship, and on Custance. Chaucer. Fr. garer, to ware, beware, take heed of; Gare! Look out! Out of the way! To gaze and gare are modified forms, differing only as Du. vriesen and vrieren, to freeze, verliesen and verlieren, to lose, kiesen and kieren, to choose—Kil.; or as Dan. glas and glar, glass. And here indeed we have a clue to the relations of the E. terms. The characteristic feature of glass is its transparency, and the radical meaning of the word is doubtless to shine, of which we have evidence in the provincial glaze-worm, synonymous with glare-worm, glow-worm—Hal.; glasyn, or make a thing to shine, polio.—Pr. Pm.

Thus *glass* would originally be that which allows the light to shine through, a sense actually preserved in N. *glas*, a window; *glisa*, *glira*, to shine through, to be open so as to let one see through. The point of view is then changed from the object which emits the light to the organ which receives it, and the expression for shining is transferred to the act of gazing or staring. Thus we have N. *glosa*, to gaze, or stare; *glora* (as E. glare), to glitter (explaining Lat. *gloria*), and also to stare; Russ. *glaz*, eye; *glazyat*, to stare. Swiss *gläs-auge*, a staring eye. E. dial. *glowre*, *glore*, to stare. Swiss *glare*, to stare; *glarig*, conspicuous, garish, glaring.— *Idioticon Bernense* in Deutsch. Mundart.
Now the instances are very numerous where words beginning with *gl* or *cl* are accompanied by parallel forms without the liquid, whether we suppose the *l* to be lost in the one case, or to be inserted in the other, or whether they have arisen independently from direct imitation. Thus we have *clatter* and *chatter*; *clack* and *chack*; *clink* and *chink*; Sc. *clatch* and *catch*; Sc. *glaum*, NE. *goam*, to snatch at a thing; Dan. *glamse*, as well as *gamse*, to snap at—Haldorsen in v. *glepsa*; N. *glana*, to stare, E. *gane*, to gape or yawn; N. *glam*, clang (*glam-hul*, the window in a belfry to let the sound out), and Fr. *gamme*, a chime of bells; N. *glingra* and E. *gingle*; N. *glapa* and *gapa*, to gape or stare, and in immediate connection with the very root we are now treating, N. *glisen* and *gisen*, what allows the light to shine through.—Aasen. In the same way we find *glaze* and *glare*, or *glowre*, parallel with *gaze* and *gare*, or *gaure*. Sw. dial. *gasa*, to stare. For the ultimate origin see Glass.

Gargle.—Gargoil. To gargle is to make liquor bubble in the throat without swallowing it, from a direct imitation of the sound produced. Lat. *gargarizare*, Turk. *ghargharaet*, gargle. Fr. *gargouiller*, a gargling or gurgling noise; *gargouiller*, to gargle, to rattle in the throat. Hence *gargouille*, the throat, also a spout or gutter voiding the rain-water of a house; and E. *gargoil*, the name given to the antic figures into which the spouts were worked in Gothic architecture.
Garland. Cat. *garlanda*, Sp. *guirnalda*, Fr. *guirlande*. From It. *gala*, festivity, festive apparel, were formed Fr. *galon*, *galant*, *galland*, ornament of the head or dress. *Galonner ses cheveux*, to deck the hair with lace or ribbons.—Roquef. *Galender*, orner, couronner.—Pat. de Champ. *Gallande*, *guirlande*, couronner. —Roquef. Hence by the conversion of the first *l* into an *r*, *garlande*. Sometimes the two modes of spelling are found in the same document. 'Le suppliant trouva un petit coffre ouvert ouquel il trouva deux *garlandes*, l'une *boutonnée* et l'autre *pleine*.—Dans *l'un* des petits coffres avoit trois *gallendes* ou chapeaux d'argent.'—Chart. A.D. 1409 in Carp. A silver wreath due by custom to the wife on the death of her husband was in some provinces of France called *chapel*, and in others *garlande d'argent*.—Duc. An intrusive *r* of similar nature may be observed in It. *gazza*, *garza*, a pie, and in Fr. *guementer*, *guermenter*, to lament.
* Garlick. ON. *geir-laukr*, from the spear-shaped leaves; *geirr*, a spear.
Sva var minn Sigurdr *hjá* sonum Gjuka, Sem *var* geirlaukr or grasi vaxinn: So was my Sigurd among the sons of Giuki, as garlick sprung up from among the grass. Lick or lock- is a frequent termination in the name of herbs, as hemlock, charlock, garlick, Swiss *kornlüge*, *galeopsis ladanum*, *weglüge*, *cichorium intybus*, from ON. *laukr*, E. leek, a pot-herb, Gael. *luibh*, formerly *luigh*, a plant. The W. *llys*, a plant, was no doubt also *llych*, the correspondence between *ch* guttural and *z* in two of the Breton dialects being of frequent occurrence.
'Geder puliol real with the rotes als mykel als the lekes:' gather pennyroyal with the roots as large as the leaves.—Medical receipts 14th cent., in Reliquiae Antiq. i. 54.
Garment. See Garnish.
Garner. Fr. *grenier*, a garner or corn-loft; *grene*, grain.—Cot.
Garnet. The Gr. *κόκκος*, a grain or kernel, was applied to the kermes, or insect used in dyeing a red colour, thence called *κόκκινος*, Lat. *coccineus*. In the same way from Lat. *granum* is Sp. *grana*, the insect used in dyeing, and thence scarlet cloth, the crimson of the cheeks and lips. It. *granato fino*, fine scarlet; *granata*, a garnet or precious stone of a fine crimson, formerly called *granate stone*. It is extremely probable that the Sp. name of the insect descends from Latin times, and that even then *granatus* was used in the sense of crimson, whence *malum granatum*. It. *granata*, Sp. *granada*, the pomegranate, although, as that fruit is equally distinguished by the number of grains with which it is filled and the fine crimson of the juice, it must remain uncertain which of these features is the one intended.
Garnish.—Garment.—Garrison. It. guarnire, Fr. garnir, to provide, supply, deck, adorn, set forth with.—Cot. Hence It. guarnimento, guarnigione, Fr. garnement, garnison, any garnishing, decking, or trimming, any habiliment, munition, or provision of war.—Fl. The n is lost in the corresponding E. terms, garment, garrison, the meaning of which is restricted by custom in the former case to the sense of clothes or bodily habiliments, in the latter to a provision of soldiers for guarding a fortress. Garsone, strong place.—Pr. Pm.

The root of garnir is seen in a simpler form in Fr. garer, to ware, beware, look out—Cot., whence garnir (as the E. equivalent warn) would properly signify to make another ware or aware of something, to make him look out, and so provide against danger. The original sense is preserved in the legal garnishee, a name given in the Lord Mayor's court to a party, who having money in his hand belonging to some one else, receives notice, or is warned, not to part with it until the claims of a third party are satisfied. See Gare.

Garret. Fr. garite, a place of refuge, and of safe retiral in a house ; hence the dungeon of a fortress whither the beleaguered soldiers make their last retire ; also a sentry or little lodge for a sentinel built on high.—Cot. In E. garret, transferred to an apartment in the roof of a house. Garytte, high soller : specula.—Pr. Pm.

The origin is Fr. garir, to take refuge, to put oneself in safety, from the connection between looking out and defence, safety. See Gare. And compare Lat. tueri, to look, to defend ; tutus, safe.
Mais ne saveit queu part aller ; N'osout des grantz foresz eissir, Kar il ne saveit ou garir :
Benoit. Chron. Norm. v. 2. 399.
—he dared not leave the forests, for he did not know where to take refuge.
Se garer dessous, to take shelter under.—Cot.

Garrison. See Garnish.

Garrulous. Lat. garrulus, from garrìo, to prate, babble.

Garter. Fr. jarretiere, jartier, or in the dialects of the North of France gartier—Hécart, from jarret, garet, the ham, or back of the leg. w., Bret. gar, ham, shank, leg.

Gas. A word coined by Van Helmont to signify a spirit not capable of being coagulated, or the most subtile and volatile parts of anything.—B. ' This I will call gas,' he says, as he gives the name of Bias to body of another kind. ' Cum chymici prorsus ad libitum sine ullo significatus aut proprietatum rerum respectu nomina imponant ; ut in Euestrum, Cagastricum. Gas, Bias, Duelech et sexcentis aliis portentosis vocabulis apparet.'—Skinner in Kelp.

Gash. 1. Pl.D. gatsken, to cut a large hole, to cut deep into the flesh, from gat, a hole. Said of a bold decisive incision, as one made by a surgeon, or a tailor.—Brem. Wtb. See Gate.
2. Prattle, pert language.—Jam. This is another instance, in addition to those mentioned under Barbarous, of the tendency to designate by the same word the splashing of water and the confused sound of idle talk. Fr. gascher, to dash, plash, flash, as water in rowing ; gascheux, plashy, washy, bespattling.—Cot.

To Gasp. ON. geispa, to yawn ; Dan. gispe, to gasp. Probably not from a modification of gape, but a direct representation of the sound made in snapping for breath. Compare Flanders gaspe, Du. ghespe, a snap, or clasp. Parallel forms with an l inserted after the initial g are ON. glepsa, N. glefsa, to gape, to snap at with the mouth. See Gare.

Gastric. Gr. γαστηρ, the belly, stomach.

Gate.—Gait. Goth. gatvo, G. gasse, Dan. gade, a street ; ON. gata, street, path ; Sw. gata, a street, way. Han gick sin egen gata ; Sc. he went his ain gate. Hence metaphorically the way, means, or manner of doing a thing. OE. algates, always, by all means ; Sc. swagates, in such wise ; monygates, in many ways.—Jam. Applied to the carriage, procedure, or gait of a man, it has acquired a distinctive spelling.
Peter the Apostel parceyvede hus gate.
And as he wente upon the water well hym knewe.
P. P. in R.

The original meaning seems a narrow opening. ON. gat, a hole, gata, to perforate ; Du. gat, a hole ; int gat zijn, in arcto versari, to be in a pinch, in difficulties ; Pl.D. gat, a hole, the mouth of a river. From a narrow hole the sense is transferred to a narrow passage or way. In ODu. gat, E. gate, an opening in an enclosure, or the door which commands it, the word approaches nearer the original meaning. Compare Lat. foris, a gate, fora.forare, to pierce. For the derivation of gat see next article.

Gat-toothed.
Gat-toothed I was, and that became me well. Wife of Bath.
This word has given much trouble to commentators. I believe it to be the equivalent of Sw. gles-tänd, N. glestent, gistent, having teeth separated from one another, from Sw. gles, N. glisen, gisen, open in texture, thinly scattered so as to allow the light to shine through. Sw. dial. gastandt, gaping like the nibs of a dry pen, having separate teeth. A similar loss of an l is seen in Cat. glassa, Fr. gaze, gauze, a texture with open interstices, from the same original root with the Scandinavian forms above mentioned, viz. glas, or glis, in the sense of shine, as shown under Gare. N. glisa, to shine through. The change of the final s or z into a t is found in many ramifications of the root, as ON. glita, to shine; N. glett, an opening among clouds; gletta, glytta, to peep, to make an opening; glytt, glott, an opening, hole, clear place among clouds; G. glatt, shining, polished, smoothed. The loss of the l as in the foregoing examples would give a root gat, git, signifying what admits the light to shine through, open, separated, exemplified in E. gat-toothed, in G. gatter, gitter, a lattice, partition with open interstices, and in ON., Pl.D., and Du. gat, a hole. See Glade.

Gather.—Gadroon. G. gattern, Du. gaderen, gaeren, to draw to a heap, to gather.
An article of dress is said to be gathered when it is drawn up in pleats, whence must be explained Fr. gauderon, goderon, the set or pleating of a ruff, also a fashion of imbossment used by goldsmiths, and termed knurling.—Cot. A gadrooned edge is one worked with imbossments like the pleats of a ruff.
A calf's gather is the chitterlings or intestines of a calf, named in many languages from their pleated structure. Gaddre, as a calf's gadre or a shepes; froissure.—Palsgr. in Hal. See Chitterling.

Gaud.—Gaudy. From Lat. gaudium, joy, OFr. gaudir, to be frolic, jolly, merry, to play the good fellow, make good cheer, to jibe, jest. Se gaudir de, to flout, scoff, be pleasant with.—Cot. Hence E. gaudy, showy, bright-coloured, like clothes worn on festive occasions; gaudy-day, a festival; and from the latter applications, to gaud, to sport, to jest—Hal., and gaud, a toy or trifle, a scoff.—B. Prov. joias d'enfanz, playthings.

To Gauge. To measure the liquid contents of a cask, subsequently applied to the measurement of other kinds of quantity. From Fr. jale, a bowl, jauger, gaulger, to estimate the number of bowls in a vessel. Jalagium, the right of selling wine by retail or the duty paid on that account. See Gallon.

Gaunt. Gawnt or lene: macer; or slender: gracilis.—Pr. Pm. Gant, scanty.—Moor.

Gauntree. A frame to set casks on in a cellar. Fr. chantier, a support for vines, gauntry or stilling for hogsheads, trestle to saw timber on—Cot.; also the stocks on which a ship is built. From Lat. cantherius, a horse of burden, then applied (as in modern languages a horse, ass, or goat) to a wooden support for various purposes. Cantherius, a prop for a vine, rafter of a roof, trestle or horse to saw timber on.—Littleton. The Germans use bock, a goat, in the last of these senses. In like manner we speak of a clothes-horse, and Fr. chevalet, a little horse, is a painter's easel (G. esel, an ass), the frame which supports his work.

Gauze. A name given to a woven fabric of transparent texture. Fr. gaze, cushion canvas, the thin canvas that serves women for a ground for their cushions or purse work.—Cot.
Among the numerous examples given under Gare of parallel forms beginning with gl and g respectively, are included glaze and gaze, with the sense originally of shining. To the first of these classes belong N. glisa, to shine through; glisen, glesen, Sw. gles, what admits of the light shining through, open in texture, thinly scattered (et glest säll, an open or coarse sieve), explaining the Cat. glassa, gauze; and to the second, E. gaze, to look, N. gisen, open in texture, leaky, standing in the same relation to Fr. gaze and E. gauze, as N. glesen to Cat. glassa.

Gavel. 1. Anything paid or done by way of rent. See Gabel.
2. Fr. javelle, a gavel or sheaf of corn, also a bavin or bundle of dry sticks.—Cot. Sp. gavilla, sheaf of corn, bundle of vineshoots, gang of suspicious persons. Probably a diminutive of gob or job, a lump or portion, as bavin of bob, Gael. bab, a lump. E. dial. jobbel, a small load.—Hal.

Gavel-kind. The custom of Kent by which all the sons of a family divided the inheritance equally. Apparently from a British source, although the word is of Gaelic rather than W. form. Gael. gabh, take ; gabhail, taking, tenure, a taking of land, lease, farm ; cine, kin, family, clan. Thus gavel-kind would mean family-tenure, as opposed to the ordinary tenure under which the whole of the land descends to the eldest son. W. gafael, a hold or grasp ; gafael o dir, a tenure of land ; gafael cenedl, tenure of a family.
—Jones.
Gawk. 1. E. dial, gawk-handed, left-handed ; gawkshaw, a left-handed man ; gallock hand, gaulic hand, left hand. Fr. gauche, left hand, awkward, wrong, awry ; gauchir, to turn aside, to shun. ON. skjálgr, skew, oblique, squinting ; skjálga, to make oblique. See Shelve.
Gawk. 2.—Gawky. It is probable that gawk, clownish, awkward, gawky, a simpleton, a clown, must be separated from the above, and (like the synonymous gaby) explained from the notion of staring. NE. gauk, to stare vacantly ; Devon gawk-a-mouth, a gaping fool.—Hal.
Gay. It. gajo, Fr. gai, merry, jolly, quick, ready, prompt in action, light or bright of colour.—Cot. Sp. gayar, to freak, variegate, chequer ; gaya, stripe of different colour on silks, ribbons, &c. ; Ptg. verde-gaio, bright green ; Rouchi gayolé, variegated.
Perhaps the true origin may be found in the analogy by which the expressions of conceptions dependent on the faculty of hearing are extended to those of similar character dependent on sight. Thus the designation of broken conspicuous colour would naturally be taken from a broken chattering sound. So from Pl.D. kikel-kakel, idle chatter, we have kakel-bunt, or kikel-kakel-bunt, many-coloured, disagreeably chequered ; Bav. gikkel-vech, gegkericht, particoloured ; Swab. gakken, to cackle ; gakkelig, particoloured. In the same way Fr. cageoler, to chatter, explains Wal. cajolé, variegated, cajoler, enjoliver, to embellish (with bright colours ?). The It. gracchiare, to chatter as a daw, stands in the same relation to Wal. cragolé (Remacle), crajolé (Grandg.), mottled, speckled ; and on the same principle may be compared Fr. garioler, to warble as birds, Sp. garlar, to chatter, with E. dial, garled, variegated, streaked, spotted, and with the change of b and g, so common in imitative forms (G. belfern, Pl.D. gelfern, to yelp ; Lang. brezilia, to warble, Fr. greziller, to crackle ; Lang. gargata and barbata, to boil), with Fr. bariolé, variegated, speckled. So also Fr. pioler, to pule, cheep or chirp like a sparrow or young bird, piolé, speckled ; piolé-riolé, gaudy or pied, diversified with sundry colours.—Cot. And again Dan. spragle, Sw. sprackla, to crackle, Dan. spraglet, Sw. spracklig, particoloured, speckled.
By a further transition the word signifying liveliness of colour seems to have been transferred to liveliness of disposition.
To Gaze. See Gare.
Gazette. Commonly derived from gazzetta, a small Venetian coin supposed to have been the price of the original newspaper. But the value of the gazetta was so small (' not worth a farthing of ours '—Fl.) that it never could have been the price either of a written or printed sheet. The radical meaning of the word is shown in It. gazetta, gazétte, all manner of idle chattings or vain prattlings, but now generally used for running reports, daily news, intelligences, and advertisements as are daily invented and written unto foreign nations, viz. from Venice, Rome, and Amsterdam.—Fl. The object of the gazette was to communicate the political chit-chat of the day. The origin of the word is a representation of the chattering sound of birds or voice, constituting a wide-spread root in very different classes of language. Prov. gasar, gazalhar, Fr. jaser, to tattle, It. gazza, a magpie or chatter-pie (as it is provincially called from its chattering voice) ; gazzerare, gazzolare, gazzettare, to chatter as a pie or a jay, to prate—Fl. ; Fr. gazouiller, to twitter, to murmur ; Pol. gadać, to talk, gadu-gadu, chit-chat ; Malay kata-kata, discourse ; Hung. csatora, noise, racket ; csacsogni, to chatter or prattle, csacsogány, a chatter-box, magpie, jack-daw.
Gazetteer. A geographical dictionary was published by Echard, 1703, under the name of The Gazetteer's or News-man's Interpreter, being a Geographical index, &c.—Sir P. S. Carey in N. & Q.
Gear. ON. gervi, AS. gearwa, habiliments, whatever is required to set a thing in action. See Garb.
Geason.—Gizen. Geason, rare, scarce.
Gizen, to open like the seams of a cask, to stare intently.—Hal. Gizzen, to sneer, laugh, or smile in a contemptuous manner.—Craven Gloss. The connection between the meanings is furnished by N. glisa, to shine through, to show interstices, as between boards that do not meet close ; glisen and (with loss of the l) gisen, opening, leaky.
Then since the individuals of a collection become rare as the interstices increase, the word implying interstices comes to signify rare. Sw. gles, open in texture, thinly scattered ; ON. gisinn, hiulcus, rarus (gaping, rare, geason).—Haldorsen.
The sense of sneering or contemptuous laughter is from the parting of the lips and letting the teeth be seen through. N. glisa, to sneer, laugh at, show the teeth.
Compare N. glan, a bright opening between clouds ; glana, to open so as to let one see through, also to stare ; glanen, open, separated. In the same way from ON. glima, to shine, shine through, gima, a crack transmitting light ; gima, to gape, or open.
Gee. To agree, to fit, to suit with.—Hal. From gee! the exclamation to make a horse go on. In Germany hott! is the word to make a horse go on, and hotte-pârd, in children's language, a horse, as gee-gee with us.—Danneil. Hence hotten, to make to go, to get on, to go—Stalder, to go forward, to succeed, to gee. Es will nickt recht hotten, it will not go, or advance rightly, it won't do, won't gee.—Küttner.
To Geld. OSw. gâll, Gael., w. caill, G. geile, the parts on which the capacity of offspring depends, the testes, ovaries. OSw. gâlla, ON. gelda, G. geilen, to remove the parts in question, to castrate. Gael. cailleadh, castration ; caillteanach, a eunuch.
Gelid. Lat. gelidus, from gelu, frost, cold.
Gem. This seems one of the words whose derivation is obscured by the loss of an l. See Gare. ON. gimlir, splendour ; gim-steinn, a shining stone, from gima, for glima, to shine. It would seem that Lat. gemma, a gem, was a borrowed word, only accidentally agreeing with gemma, a bud.
Gemini!—By Gis. The wish to avoid the sin of profane swearing without giving up the gratification of the practice has led to the mangling of the terms used in exclamation, so as to deprive them of all apparent reference to sacred things. Hence Fr. mort bleu, corbleu, for mort, corps de Dieu! sapperment for sacrament; Swab. mein echel, for mein eid; Alsace bi Gobb! bi Golle! bi Gosch! Gotz! Botz! Potz! O Jeses! O Je! Jerum, Jere, Jemer, Jeigger, Jegesle, Jemine.—Deutsch.
Mundart. iii. 503. Pl.D. Je! Jes! Herr Jes! Jemine!—Danneil.
Gender.—General.—Generation. Lat. genus, Fr. genre, a race, family, breed; genero, to beget, Fr. engendrer; generalis, pertaining to kind, also common or universal.
Genealogy. Gr. γενεά, race, pedigree.
General.—Generate, -gener-. Lat. genus, generis, kind. To Degenerate, to fall off from its proper kind.
Genesis. Gr. γένεσις, procreation, origin, beginning.
Genet. A small-sized Spanish horse. Sp. gineto, a light horseman, named from the Berber tribe of Zeneta, who supplied the Moorish sultans of Grenada with a body of horse on which they placed great reliance. Their short lance was called in Sp. gineta, in It. giannetta, and in the testament of Peter the Cruel mention is made of espada gineta, and silla gineta. To ride alla gineta was to ride with short stirrups like the Moors. The Spanish, Italian, and French have also given the name of gineto, ginnetto, giannetto, genet, to a kind of entire Spanish horse.—Dozy.
Genial. Lat. genialis, from genius, the spirit or nature of a man. Congenial, of like taste or disposition.
Genital.—Genitive. Lat. gigno, genitum, to beget.
Genteel.—Gentle. Fr. gentil, gentle, tractable, courteous, comely, pretty.—Cot. Lat. gentilis, of a nation or family, and κατ' ἐξοχήν, of good family, as we say a person of family for a well-bred person.
Gentoo. The pagan natives, as well of India as of America, were called by the Portuguese Gentio, gentile, pagan, idolatrous, savage. Hence the Brahmins, who were first made known to us by the Portuguese, were called Gentoos, as if it had been the proper name of the people themselves. 'The Indians of the interior still remaining in the savage state are called by the Brazilians Indios or Gentios (Heathens).'-Bates, Naturalist on the Amazons, i. 77.
Geo-. Gr. γεω-, from γέα, γῆ, the earth ; as in Geography, description of the earth ; Geometry, measuring of the earth ; Georgics, the science of cultivation of the earth (ἐργάω, to cultivate, till), &c.
Geranium. Cranesbill, from Gr. γερανός, a crane ; on account of the long projecting spike of the seed-capsule.
Germ.—Germinate. Lat. germen, a bud, origin of growth ; germinare, to put forth buds.
Gesses. The short straps with a ring attached, round the feet of a hawk, which were cast loose when he was let fly, were called gesses, It. getti, Fr. gects; from gect, a cast or throw, Lat. jacere, to cast.
Gest. 1. From Fr. giste, a lying or lodging, the appointed rest for the court on a royal progress; thence used in 'Winter's Tale' for the appointed time of departure. Strype says that Cranmer entreated Cecil 'to let him have the new-resolved-upon gests, that he might from time to time know where the king was.'

Gest. 2.—Jest. From Lat. gerere, gestum, to do, a feat or deed done, and thence a relation, story. The Gesta Romanorum was a celebrated collection of stories in vogue in the middle ages.
The Roman gestes makyng remembrance Of many a veray trewe wif also.
Merchant's Tale.
A gestour was a person whose profession was to entertain a company with the narration of stories.
Do come, he saied, my ministralis And jestours to tell us tales Anon in mine armynge, Of Romances that ben royals Of Popes and of Cardinals, And eke of love longynge.—Sir Thopas.

Geeste, or romaunce : gestio, gestus.—Pr. Par. When the telling of stories became a professional occupation the subject of the gestor would embrace everything adapted to excite interest or to raise a laugh, and as the latter in those coarse times was the easier and more popular line of endeavour, it seems gradually to have narrowed the meaning of jest to a subject of laughter. 'Gest, a tale; gestyng, bourde.'—Palsgr. in Way. At the same time it is very possible that gest in the sense of joke had an independent footing in the language. Sp. chistar, to mutter, to utter a slight sound; ni chistar ni mistar, to be perfectly silent; chiste, a jest, on the same principle probably that we have Ptg. zumbir, to hum, zombar, to jeer or jest. ON. gís, jeering, bantering, teasing.

-gest, -gestion.—Gesture.—Gest-ation. Lat. gero, gestum, to bear, carry on. As in Congest, Digestion, &c.
To Get. The fundamental sense seems to be to seize, to become possessed of, to acquire offspring. To forget, to awayget, to lose one's mental acquisitions.
Goth. bigitan, to find. AS. andgitan, to understand; bigitan, to get, acquire, obtain. ON. geta, to conceive, beget, acquire, to be able, also to make mention of a thing.

Get.—Jet. Get, or manner or custome, modus, consuetudo.—Pr. Par. Gette, a custom; newe jeite, guise nouvelle.—Palsgr. Perhaps from gait or gate, a way. Ill gaited, having bad habits, perverse, froward.—Jam. But it is more probably an application of the verb get in the sense of devise, contrive. So it is used by Chaucer with respect to the contrivance of the alchemist who, having filled a hollow stick with silver filings, With his stikke above the crosselet That was ordained with that false get. He stirreth the coles.

* Gewgaw. A plaything, a showy trifle. 'Babiole, a trifle, whimwham, guigaw or small toy for a child to play withal.'—Cot. 'Fariboles, fond tattling, idle discourses, trifles, flimflams, whywhaws.'—Cot. Here the synonymous flimflam, whimwham, whywhaw, guigaw, gewgaw, although they cannot be supposed to spring from a common root, yet are manifestly formed on a similar plan, the principle of which seems to be to represent light movement to and fro as opposed to steady continuance in a fixed direction. Hence the signification of something done without settled purpose, trifling, child's play, in opposition to work done with a settled purpose. Pl.D. wiggelwaggeln, to go wigglewaggle, is to waver to and fro. Hence wigwag, whywhaw, guigaw. In Suffolk one ploughing unskilfully would be said 'to woowhaw about.'—Moor. To go giggajoggie, to move to and fro.—Florio. In G. nursery language gickgack, a clock, represents the vibration of the pendulum. Gygampfen (Sanders), Swab. gugen, to move to and fro. Gugen und gagen wie ein wagend rohr: shilly shally like a waving reed.—Schmeller. Pl.D. gigeln, to fiddle, is from the movement of the bow to and fro over the strings. On the same principle the name of gewgaw is given in the N. of E. to a jew's-harp, from the jigging movement of the hand continually striking the projecting tongue of the instrument. We pass to the idea of trifling in Swiss gäggelen, to trifle; gäggelzeüg, playthings, toys, trifles; E. gig, a silly flighty person; giggish, trifling, silly, flighty.—Hal.

Ghastly. See Aghast.
Gherkin. G. Gürke, Pol. ogorek, pl. ogorki. Boh. okurka, a cucumber.
Ghost. AS. gast, G. geist, a spirit.
Giant. Fr. géant, Lat. gigas, gigantis.
Gib-cat. A male cat, as we now say Tom-cat. 'Thibert le cas' in R. R. is translated by Chaucer, 'Gibbe our cat,'

Gib being short for Gilbert, the equivalent of Fr. Thibert.
Gibe.—Gib. As gabble, gabber, vary with gibber in representing the sound made by rapid, senseless talking; so we had formerly gib as well as gab in the sense of the mouth or muzzle. 'We'll call him Cacodjemon with his black gib there.'—B. and F. in R.
Hence to gibe, properly to wry the mouth, to make faces, as from the equivalent W. gwep, beak, face, gwepio, to make a wry face, grin, mock. N. gjeipa, gleipa, Sw. gipa, to wry the mouth, make faces.—Aasen. As the N. gj is pronounced nearly as e. j., the foregoing gjeipa is probably the immediate origin of OE. jape, mockery, joke.
To Gibber.—Gibberish. Gibber, like gabber, jabber, and gabble, represents the sound of rapid talking without reference to meaning, whence gibberish, gibbering, an utterance of articulate sounds without sense. ON. gifra, to jabber.
Gibbet. The gibbet seems originally to have been not a mere projecting arm of gallows to which a man must be raised in order to hang him, but a contrivance like the wipe of a well, by which the sufferer could at once be swung up into the air. We find it spoken of as actually raising the sufferer from the ground.
Vultibus erectis sursum tollente gibeto Digna Jovi fiunt oblatio, jure levati A tellure procul.—Willelm. Brito in Duc.
And Matthew Paris designates it as 'machinam illam pœnalem quæ gibet appellatur,' language implying some mechanical contrivance beyond what would be applicable to a simple support. The root (somewhat disguised by an initial w, which is so commonly found interchanging with a g) is seen in Du. wip, indicating any sudden reciprocating movement, as a wink of the eye; wippen, to toss, jerk up into the air—P. Marin; wippe, tolleno, a wipe, or lever for lifting water out of a well, patibulum tollenonis instar constructum, a gallows made like a wipe, i. e. a gibbet.—Kil. Sw. wippa, to whip or trice up; wippkärra, a tumbril; wipp-galge, a gibbet. The exact root is preserved in E. gib, to start suddenly back, or from side to side; Du. gijpen (des voiles), se tourner subitement—P. Marin; Sw. gippa, to whip up into the air, as we speak of gibbeting a toad—Rietz; gippa upp, to strike up, tilt up; guppa, to move up and down, to rock as a boat; Dan. dial. gimpe, to rock, to swing; Fr. regimber, OFr. regiber, to wince.

Gibbous. Lat. gibbus, a bunch, hump, swelling on the back or other part of the body.
Giblets. The odds and ends cut off in trimming a goose for roasting. Probably the meaning is simply bits, scraps, a further dim. of Fr. gobeau, a bit, gobbet, morsel.—Cot. It. gobbo, gibbo, a hump. In the same way E. dial. gubbins (gubbings), fragments, parings of codfish, &c.—B.
Giddy. Unsteady, on the verge of falling. Gael. godach, giddy, coquettish. N. gidda, to shake, to tremble. From the notion of rapid reciprocating action represented by the parallel forms gib, gid, gig. See Gibbet, and next article.
Gig.—Giglet. A series of abrupt sounds was represented by syllables like gick-gack, gig-gag. In G. nursery language gigk-gagk is a clock, from the ticking of the pendulum—D. M. v. 434; and provincially gigkezen, gagkezen, to stutter.—Ib. v. 341. Swab. gigacken (Du. gugagen), to heehaw or bray like an ass, to cackle like geese. And see Giggle.
The syllables representing broken sound are then applied to broken movements or the subject of such movements as in the case of gigk-gagk above mentioned, where the change of vowel in the two syllables represents the reciprocating movement of the pendulum. Bav. gigelen, to palpitate, to quiver; gaugken, gaugkeln, gaggln, to totter, stagger, sway to and fro; Swiss gageln, to joggle; gagli, a girl that cannot sit still; gaggelen, to toy, to trifle; gaggeli-werk, trifles, toys; Pl.D. gigeln (MHG. gigen, G. geigen), to play on the fiddle—Danneil; gigeln, be-gigeln, to diddle, to deceive, properly to deceive the eye by rapid movements to and fro. Bav. gigl, the feet.
Gig in English is applied to various objects characterised by a short quick movement, or by gigging, reciprocating or whirling motion. Banff. gig, giggum, Bav. geek, a trick; E. dial. gig, a machine for dressing cloth, for winnowing corn (also as MHG. gige, G. geige, It. ghiga, giga), a fiddle.—Hal. A gig is a carriage consisting of a seat balanced on a pair of shafts by which the jogging of the horse's trot is communicated to the persons in the gig. Gig, a toy, a top, a silly flighty person; giggish, trifling, flighty, wanton; giggli, giglet, gigsy, a flighty person, a giddy girl.—Hal. Fr. gigues, a light versatile girl. See Jig.
Giggle. Bav. gigken, gigkezen, to utter inarticulate sounds either in stuttering, retching, or giggling with restrained laughter ; gagkern, gagkezen, to cackle like a hen, to stutter. Du. gicken, gic-kelen, cachinnari.—Kil. Swiss gigelen, gigeren, to giggle, G. dial. gibbeln, to laugh.—D. M. iii. 552.
Gill. I. A small measure of liquids. Gylte, lytylle pot.—Pr. Pm. Gillo, vas fictile.—Gloss. in Duc. Vascula vinaria quæ mutato nomine guillones aut flas-cones appellant.—Paulus Diaconus in Duc.
2. Sw. fisk-gel, the gills of a fish. AS. geaflas, geaglas, geahlas, Fr. gifle, the chaps, jaws, jowl. Gael. gial, jaw, cheek, gill of a fish. OHG. chela, guttur, brancia —Gl. in Graff; G. kehle, Lat. gula, throat; AS. ceole, faucis.
Gilly-flower. Formerly written gilo-fer, gillover, gillow-flower, immediately from Fr. giroflée, and that from It. garo-falo, Lat. caryophyllus, a clove, from the clove-like smell of the flower.
Gimcrack. See Gimmal.
Gimlet. Lang. jhimbelet (jh pro-nounced as E. soft g), Fr. gimbelet, gibe-let, a gimlet, from Lang. jhimbla, to twist, E. gib, to turn suddenly, as wimble, an auger, from Du. wemelen, Sc. wammle, to turn round.
Gimmals.—Gimmers. Gimmal, an-nulus gemellus—Coles, a twin or double ring. The term was generally applied to rings, or corresponding members of a joint working into each other, as the rings of a hawberk or coat of mail, the arms of a tongs, two portions of a hinge, and thence the hinge itself. Gimewes (or joints) of a spur, membres or membrets d'éperon.—Sherwood. Gimmow of a door, cardo.—Huloet in Way. Trevisa speaks of an iron ' made as it were a peire tonges i-gemewde (ygemewed) as tonges in the myddes.' Jimmers, jointed hinges.—Ray.
From Lat. gemelli, Fr. jumeaux, ju-melles, twins. In the same way the Bret. gevel, a twin, is applied to each of the parts in a double instrument, as a pair of tongs. The term was then applied to the separate members of the works in a com-plicated piece of machinery, or to any mechanical device for producing motion.
My acts are like the motional gimbals Fixed in a watch.—Vow-breaker in Nares.
' The famous Kentish idol moved her hands and eyes by those secret gimmers which now every puppet play can imitate.'—Hall in Todd. But whether it were that the rebel his powder failed him, or some gimbol or other were out of frame.'—Hollinshed in N. Hence gimcrack.
Gimp. A kind of lace made of threads whipped or twisted round with silk. The corresponding Fr. is guipure, from guiper, to whip.—Boyer. The same correspond-ence between a nasalised form and one without the nasal is seen in Fr. gibelet, E. gimblet, from a different application of the same root with the fundamental mean-ing of turning or twisting. G. gimf, a loop, lace, or edging of silk, gold, or silver.
Gin. A mechanical contrivance, a trap, or snare.
And whan ye come ther as ye list abide, Bid him descend, and trill another pin (For therein lieth the effect of all the gin), And he wol down descend and don your will. Squier's Tale in R.
So, so, the woodcock's ginn'd.—B. & F. in R.
From Lat. ingenium, natural disposition, talents, invention, Fr. engin, an engine, instrument, also understanding, policy, reach of wit, also [when the contrivance is applied to a bad purpose] fraud, craft, deceit.—Cot. Prov. genh, geinh, ginh. Cat. enginy, giny, skill, machine.
In the sense of a trap or snare we might be tempted to look to the ON. ginna, to allure, deceive, the agreement with which is probably accidental.
Ginger. Lat. gingiber, zingiber.
To Gingle. See Jingle.
Gipsire. A purse, from Fr. gibbecière, a pouch, and that from gibbe, a bunch, anything that stands poking out; gib-basse, a great bunch, or hulch-like swell-ing, a pouch, or budget.—Cot.
To Gird. 1.—Girth. — Girdle. ON. giord, a belt, girth, band ; tunna-giord, the hoop of a cask. Goth. gairda, G. gurt, gürtel, a girdle.
ON. gardr, gerdi, a fence, hedge ; gerda, girda, to inclose or surround with a fence (Jonsson); also to gird (Haldors.), girda sig sverdi. Girdi, a hoop, band ; girdis-vidr, hoopwood; girding, hedge, fence, inclosure, girdle, belt ; girtr, girded, hooped.
To Gird. 2.—Gride. To gird or gride was formerly used in the sense of striking, piercing, cutting ; and thence metaphori-cally, gird, a sharp retort, a sarcasm.
And girdeth of Gyle's heed.—P. P.
As one through-gyrt with many a wound. Surry in Nares.
Last with his goad amongst them he doth go, And some of them he grideth in the haunches, Some in the flanks, that pricked their very paunches.—Drayton.
The primary image is the sound of a smart blow with a rod, or the like, giving rise to a root which under numerous modifications is applied to the act of striking or cutting, or any sharp sudden action, as kicking, starting forwards. Gamelyn—gert him full upon the nek. That he the bone to brak.—Gamelyn, 598. OHG. gartotun, perfodiebant [ilia].—Graff. G. gerte, Du. gard, gaerde, E. yard, a rod. Bav. gart, gärten, switches; birkene gärtn, a birch rod. E. jert, synonymous with gird, a sharp touch by word of mouth. 'Attainte, a reach, hit, home-stroke, also a gentle nip, quip, or jert, a slight gird.'—Cot. Then, with a change of the final t into k, jirk, yirk, yark, to strike, kick, fling. To jerke, fouetter avec des verges.—Sherwood. Girk, a rod, to chastise, or beat. You must be jerking at the times forsooth. The Ordinary, iv. 4. To yerk, to kick like a horse; yark, to strike, to beat, a stroke, jerk, snatch, pull.—Hal. A yark with a whip.—Fl. Comp. Fr. ruer, to hurl; ruer coups sur, to pour blows on; ruer des pieds, to kick, wince, jerk, fling.—Cot.
Girl. Formerly applied to children of both sexes. Here knave gerlys I shall steke.—Slaughter of the Innocents, Coventry Myst. 181. Grammar for girles I garte firste to write And bette them with a balys but if they wolde lerne.—P. P. In milke and in mele To maken with papelottes (pap, gruel) to aglotye with her gurles (to satisfy their children).—P. P. Pl.D. gör, göre, a child; gören-kraam (kinderey), childish tricks; gören-snak, childish talk.—Brem. Wtb. In Ham-burgh görr is now used for a girl. Swiss gurre, gurrli, a depreciatory term for a girl.
Gist. The ground on which an action is brought against one, the ground on which it lies. OFr. giste, lying place, lodging, from gesir, Lat. jacere, to lie.
To Give. Goth. giban, to give; Gael. gabh, take, lay hold of, seize. Of this perhaps give is the causative, to cause another to take. In the same way to take was formerly used in the sense of deliver up to, or give,—to Progne he goth And prively taketh her the cloth.—Gower.
Gizzard. Fr. gesier, Lang. grezié, from Lang. gres, Fr. grésil, gravel, the gizzard being filled with little stones.

For the same reason it is also called perié, or peirié in Lang., from peiro, stone.
To Glabber. To speak indistinctly as children that have not learned to articulate properly.—Jam. Cai. parlar a glops, to gabble, praepropere festinanterque loqui; glop, the sound of a gulp of liquid.
Glacial. Lat. glacies, ice.
Glacis. The slope outside a fortification, from the parapet of the covered way to the general level of the field. Fr. glacis, a gentle sloping downwards. From OFr. glacer, glacier, to slide, in which is apparently preserved the root of Lat. glacies, ice. Glacier, to slip, slide.—Pat. de Champagne. Glacynge, or wrong glydynge of boltys or arrowis.—Pr. Pm.
Glad. Du. glad, glaf, smooth, polished, slippery, formerly burning, bright (gloedende).—Kil. Then metaphorically applied to a bright and cheerful countenance. Sw. glad, joyful, cheerful. Glada rume i et hus, lightsome rooms in a house; glattig, cheerful. Da. glat, smooth, slippery; glad, joyous. ON. gladr, bright, shining, cheerful, glad. In the same way Gr. φαιδρός, brilliant, shining, cheerful, joyful. Oculi hilaritate nitescunt et tristitia quoddam nubilum ducunt.—Quint. Connected with a numerous class of words founded on the notion of shining; ON. glita, to shine, E. glisten, glitter, &c. See Glass.
Glade. A light passage made through a wood, also a beam or breaking in of the light.—B. Glauds, hot gleams between showers.—Baker. The fundamental meaning is a passage for the light, either through trees or through clouds. N. glette, a clear spot among clouds, a little taking up in the weather; gletta, to peep; glott, an opening, a clear spot among clouds. ON. glita, Sc. gleit, to shine. In the same way E. lawn, synonymous with glade, may be compared with N. glenna, a clear space in a wood, glan, an opening among clouds; glanen (of clouds or trees in a wood), open, allowing one to look through; glana, to separate as clouds, to clear up, to look, to peep. The loss of the l obscures the fundamental identity of glade with Da. gade, a street, ON. gata, a street, a footpath. A similar equivalence of forms with an initial gl and g respectively is seen in Sc. glabber and gabber, to gabble; G. glaffen and gaffen, N. glapa and gapa, to gape or stare; O.N. glingra, E. gingle; Da. glam, clangour of bells, Fr. gamme, peal of bells; N. glantri, Da. ganteri, foolery, and in numerous other cases mentioned under Gaze, Geason, Gat-toothed.
Glair. Gleyre of eyryne or other lyke, glarea.—Pr. Pm. Fr. glaire, Prov. glara, Clara, Sp. clara, It. chiara, white of egg. Chiare, d'uovo, the white or clear of an egg.—Fl. As far as the foregoing sense is concerned the word might well be derived from Lat. clarus, and from the white of an egg the term might perhaps be transferred to other viscous substances. But this overlooks the connection with Sc. glar, glare, glaur, mud, mire, slime; glorg, a nasty mess; glorgie, bedawbed (Jam.); glorgyn, or wyth onclene thynge defoylyn, maculo, deturpo.—Pr. Pm.

Geordie spat out The glaur that adown his beard ran.
Nichols' Poems.

Cambr. glaire, a miry puddle.—Hal.
The radical image is perhaps that of something slippery, with which the idea of shining is closely connected. Swiss glaren, gloren, to shine; glarig, glorig, shining, smooth; Fris. glar, slippery. 'E iis is glar' the ice is slippery.—Outzen. Banff glaur, slippery ice. E. dial. glire, gleer, to slide; Pl.D. glirrig, slippery.—Schütze. It is however very difficult to know when we have come to the bottom of one of these complicated trains of thought. The Bret. glaour, slaver, W. glafoerio, E. glaver, to slaver, seem to point in a different direction to the foregoing.

Glaive. A long sword or bill.—B. A halbert-like weapon, consisting of a blade mounted on a long handle. W. cleddyf, Gael. claidheamh (pronounced klllyhev—Macalpine), a sword; claidheamh-mor (claymour), a broadsword. W. glaif, a bill-hook. Sw. glafven, Du. glavie, a lance, spear. E. dial. gleeve, an eel-spear.—Baker.
Probably direct from the Celtic, although Diez supposes Fr. glaive to be formed through the medium of Lat. gladius, whence Prov. gladi, glazi, glavi, as from adulterum, avulteri, avulteri.

Glamour. Properly false shine, deception of sight. To cast glamour o'er one, to cause magical deception.
It had much of glamour might, Could make a lady seem a knight.
Lay of Last Minstrel.
ON. glámsýni, when things appear other than what they really are.—Fritzner. Dan. glimmer, glitter, false lustre. In like manner G. gleisen, to cast a faint lustre, to play the hypocrite, to make a false show.

Originally, like all words expressing visual ideas (as explained under Bright) derived from the faculty of hearing. Gael. glam, outcry; ON. glam, clash, clangour; glamra, to rattle; Sc. glamer, noise, clatter. For the passage to the idea of glitter, compare ON. glingra, to rattle, jingle, also to glitter, give a false shine.

Glance. The fundamental idea is the shining of a polished surface, then the slipping aside, as of an arrow striking against a polished surface, or of a ray of light reflected from it, then a sidelong or momentary look. Du. glants, G. glanz, lustre, splendour; ON. glis, glitter; Sc. gleis, splendour; G., Du. gleissen, to shine; glissen, glisten, G. glitschen, Fr. glisser, glinser, esclincer, glasser, glacer, glacier, to slip, slide; OE. glace, to polish, to glance as an arrow turned aside.—Pr. Pm. Lat. glacies, ice, from its slipperiness, and E. glass, from its transparency, belong to the same root. Du. glisteren, glinsteren, to glisten, glister. Other forms are Du. glad, G. glatt, shining, polished, smooth; N. glita, Sc. gleit, to shine; to glent or glint, to glance or gleam, to pass suddenly as a gleam of light, to glide, to peep, to squint.—Jam. 'The stroke glented down to his belly.'—Berners' Froissart. W. ysglentio, to slide. Da. glindse, to glisten, gives an intermediate form between glint and glance, while Da. glimt, a gleam, glimpse, flash, would unite glint with gleam instead of glitter. The truth seems to be that the words signifying shining are derived from a number of representations of the same kind of sound, having commonly more or less resemblance to each other, and this general resemblance in the roots causes a network of relationship in the words derived from them.

Gland. Lat. glans, glandis, an acorn, a kernel in the flesh.

Glanders. OFr. glandre, a swelling of the glands, a sore.
El col nues glandres out, K'em escrovele numer seout.
In her neck she had naked sores, which men are used to call scrofula.—Life K. Edward in Benoit, 2612.

Glare. A dazzling light; to glare, to shine with excess of brightness, to stare intently upon. Glare, to glaze earthenware.—Hal. N. glora, to shine, to stare; Swiss glare, to stare. Applied in the first instance to phenomena of hearing. Gael. glòr, noise, speech, glòdrach, noisy, clamorous.

; Lat. gloria, renown, claritas nominis, splendor, amplitudo. — Facciolati.
Compare Bohem. hlas, the voice, fame ; Pol. glos, the voice ; glosny, loud, famous, notorious. Lat. clarus, which is applied as well to visual as to audible phenomena, is another modification of the same root.
See next article.

Glass.—Glaze. ON. gler, Da. glar, glas, glass. From the notion of transparency ; what allows the light to shine through. N. Glas, a window ; glisa, to shine through ; glira, to be open so that one can see through ; glosa, glora, to gaze, to shine ; Sc. glose, gloze, to blaze, Du. gleysen, G. gleyssen, to shine. To glaze, in the sense of making a thing to shine, is now confined to the surface of earthenware, but was formerly used in a much more general application. Glacyn, or make a thynge to shine, pernitido, polio ; glacynge or scowrynge of harneys, pernitidacio.—Pr. Pm. Fr. glacé, polished, shining, is familiar in the expression glacé silks. Glaze-worm, glass-worm, a glowworm.—Hal. Looking here to like origin with that of the twin form glare, we find Fr. glas, noise, crying, bawling ; Russ. glas', the voice, Serv. glas, voice, news, fame ; Bohem. hlas, voice, fame, hlasyty, sonorous, clear ; Pol. glos, sound, voice, speech ; glosny, loud, famous, notorious ; Russ. glas', the eye, gledanie, sight, seeing ; Serv. glati, gledati, to see, to seek.
Swab. glascht, the voice, glast, brilliancy, splendour, glasten, to shine, to glance.—
Schmid.

To Glaver. To soothe or flatter.—B.
To glaffer, to flatter.—Hal. To glaver, to slaver.—Hal. ; to talk foolishly.—Brocket.
W. glafoerion, slaver ; Bret. glaouren, glaour, slaver, glaourek, slavering, talkative ; Sc. glabber, to speak indistinctly, as children ; Ir. glafaire, glagaire, a babbler ; glifrim, to prate. The connection between the ideas of slavering and prattling is seen in Fr. baver, to slaver, drivel, also to famble or flatter in speaking ; bavard, a slaverer, babbler.—Cot.

Glead. A kite. The names of hawks are often from their gliding or hovering motion. So W. cud, a kite, from cudio, to hover ; cudyll y gwynt, the kestril or wind-hover. Lith. linge, the kite, from lingoti, to hover. Dan. glente, kite, OE. glent w. ysglentio, to slide ; and in like manner E. glead from glide.

Gleam.—Glimmer. Du. glimmen, glimpen, ignescere, candere.—Kil. Pl.D. glimmen, glimmern, to shine ; G. glimmen, glummen, to glow, shine in a covert way ; Sw. glimma, to glitter ; N. glima, to shine bright, dazzle ; glima, a beam of light ; ON. liomi, splendour, AS. leoman, to shine, OE. leem, liom, a gleam.
ON. glampa, to glitter, shine. The original image, as in all these expressions for the action of light, is a loud sound.
ON. Glamm, a ringing, rattle ; glymia, to resound ; glymr, glumr, resonance, noise ; glumra, glamra, to jingle, rattle, rumble.
Gr. λάμπω, to ring loud and clear, as well as to shine ; λαμπρός, brilliant, sonorous, clear.

To Glean. Fr. glaner, from glane, galeyne, a handful ; glenon, a bunch of hay, straw, vegetables.—Roquef.
Deus meyns ensemble, vodes ou pleyns, Sount apelés les galeyns.—Bibelsworth.
Ainsi que le suppliant batoit un pou de glaines, ou gerbes de bled.—Carp. Glean (in Kent), a handful of corn tied together by a gleaner.—Hal. Glane d'oignons, a bunch of onions.—Diez. Glana, gleba alliorum ; gelina, gelima, gelida, geliba, eyn schouff off garve (a sheaf or bundle), eyn kleyn garbe.—Dief. Sup. Du. gluye, a bunch of straw or sedge, vulgo glema, gelima.—Kil. The form gelima leads to AS. gelm, gilm, E. dial. yelm, a sheaf, handful of corn or straw. To yelm straw, to lay it in order for a thatcher (i. e. in handfuls).—Hal. To gleame corne, spicilegere.—Levins. For the change of m and n compare gerner for germer, to bud.
—Hécart.
Possibly the formation of the word may be explained from Lith. glebys, an armful ; globti, glomoti, to embrace, to hold in the arms.

Glebe. Lat. gleba, a clod, lump of earth.

Glede. A hot ember, live coal.—B.
ON. gloa, to glow, burn, shine ; glod, live coal. G. glühen, to glow, be red-hot ; gluth, the glowing of fire, hot coals, great heat. Du. gloed, hot coals, gloeden, gloeyen, to glow. See Glow.

Glee. AS. Glig, gliw, music, sport, joke ; gligman, a minstrel, buffoon ; gliowian, gliwian, to sing, jest, play. ON. glý, laughter (Rietz), mirth, joy (Fritzner); glýja, to divert, delight, rejoice ; glýjari, a juggler, buffoon ; glotta, to laugh, to sneer. Sw. dial. gly, glyt, glut, sport, derision ; göra gly, to make sport of, to deride. ON. hlæja, to laugh, hlægja, to divert, to cause to laugh ; hlæi, laughter, sport, Gr. γελῶ, I laugh.

To Glee.—Gley.—Gly. To squint.
Glyare, gloyere or gogyl-eye, limus, strabo.
—Pr. Pm.

The elder sister he forsoke, For she glyed seith the boke. Cursor Mundi in Hal.
She had sore eyes. Sc. to gley, gly, to look obliquely, squint. The primary sense of the verb is to shine, then to glance, to look. In the founte ther stonden stones stepe As glente thurgh glas that glowed and glyht. Allit. Poems, A. 114. The gome glyht on the grene gracious leves, Ib. C. 453. ON. gljâ, glæa, Sw. dial. glia, to glance, shine; NE. glea, aglea, crooked; to gledge, to look asquint.—Jam. Gr. γλοιοε, slip-pery; γλοσσω, to cast aside glance. Pl.D. gliden, glien, to slip or slide.

To Gleek. To jeer, joke, jibe, or banter.—B. Du. glicken (parallel with blicken), to shine ; Sc. glaiks, reflection of the rays of light from a lucid body in motion; to cast the glaiks on one, to dazzle, confound ; glaik, a deception, trick; to play the glaiks, get the glaiks, to cheat, be cheated. To glaik, to trifle, glaiking, folly, wantonness. ON. leika, to play; OE. to lake, to play; lakin, plaything.

Glender. To stare, to look earnestly.—Hal. Also to look aside, to squint. Sw. glindra (glengra—Rietz), to shine, to glimmer ; ON. glingra, to jingle, rattle, to shine delusively. MHG. glander, glitter, shining.

Gleyme. Slime, glue. Gleyme or rewme, reuma ; gleyme of knyttynge or byndynge togedders, limus, gluten ; gleymyn or yngleymyn, visco, invisco.—Pr. Pm. Viscus, gleme or lyme.—Ortus in Way. NE. glime, the mucus from the nostrils of cattle.—Hal. Related to slime, as Du. glibberig to slibberig, slippery; glippen, to escape, to E. slip; glide to slide; Sc. glent to Sw. slinta, to slide. Probably the radical image is the slipperiness of a viscous liquid.

Glib. Slippery, smooth.—B. Pl.D. glippen, N. gleppa, to slip ; Du. glibberig, E. dial. glaber, glibbery, slippery ; glafe, smooth, polite.—Hal. Da. glippe, to slip, to miss, to wink ; Sc. gliff, a glimpse, a glance. Lat. glaber, smooth, without hair, seems from the same source ; and without the initial g, labi, to slide, lubricus, slippery. Lith. glebti, to be slippery.

Glidder. Slippery.—Hal. B. Jonson speaks of a galley-pot being well gliddered, i. e. glazed. Sw. glindra, to glimmer, shine. Da. dial. glidder, slippery; gluddre, to smooth a wall plastered with clay. Sc. gliddry, gloittry, unctuous, slippery ; to gloit, to work with the hands in something liquid, miry, and viscous. E. dial. glut, the slimy substance in a hawk's pannel ; Fr. glette, the froth of an egg, phlegm or filth which a hawk throws out at her beak after her casting, gletteux, slimy, flegmy, filthy.—Cot. Pl.D. glett, slippery, E. gleet, a slimy discharge.

To Glide. Du. glijden, glijen, glissen, Pl.D. gliden, glien, G. gleiten, glitschen, gleissen, Fr. glisser, to slide, slip. There is obviously a close connection between the notions of a glittering, shining surface and of a smooth and slippery one. Thus we have ON. glaðr, shining, clear, bright; Du. glad, bright, shining, sleek, smooth, slippery.—Bomhoff. Devon glidder, slippery. So ON. glita, to shine, leads to Sw. glida, to glide, while both senses are preserved in the dialectic glia, to glow, to shine, and also to glide, slide, flow. So E. gloss, glossy, and Sw. dial. glisa, to shine, gleam, correspond to G. gleissen, Fr. glisser, to slide. E. glance, to shine, is also used in the sense of slipping aside; and here indeed we are distinctly conscious that the latter sense is taken from the oblique reflection of light from a smooth surface. The same is the case with Sc. glent, glint, to flash, gleam, glance, also to start aside. 'T' shot corns glinted aff his wings lahk rain aff a duck's back.'—Atkinson. Sw. dial. glant, slippery ; glanta, glinta, W. ysglentio, to slip, slide. In the same way N. glira, to peep, properly to shine ; E. dial. glire, gleer, to slide.—Hal.

To Glie. To squint, to look askew.
The elder sister he forsoke, For she glyed, seith the boke. Cursor Mundi.
Sw. dial. glia, to gleam, also to glide, slide. See Glide. Compare also gleam with NE. glim, to look askance.—Hal.

Glender, a slight squint, is the equivalent of Sw. glindra, to glitter. When a surface is imperfectly polished it only reflects slanting light.

Glimmer. See Gleam.

Glimpse. A flash of light, transient glance. Swiss glumsen, a spark, glimmen, glimsen, to glow under the ashes ; Du. glimpen, glinsen, to glow, to sparkle.
And little glowworms glimpsing in the dark. Nares.
Da. glimte, to gleam, flash. See Gleam.

To Glisten.—Glister.—Glitter. Du. glisteren, glinsteren, to sparkle, AS. glisian, glisnian, glistenan, to glisten, ON. glyssa, glytta, glitra, to sparkle, glitter. A number of related forms are seen under Glass.

It would doubtless be an error to suppose all these forms to be successively developed from any one root such as glas or glat. We should rather suppose that the noises, which constitute the original image in the expression of visual conceptions, were represented independently by forms bearing a certain resemblance to each other, which was preserved through subsequent modifications when the terms were applied to visual phenomena, giving them the false appearance of descent from a common root. Thus we have Fr. glas, noise, bawling; Prov. glat, yelp, cry, chatter of birds, E. clash, clatter, which when appropriated by the faculty of sight produce forms like glass, gloss, glat (polished), glitter, glister. A form closely allied with glisten and glister is applied to phenomena of hearing or the sense which apprehends them in Du. luysteren, to whisper, or to listen, Pl.D. lustern, glustern, AS. hlystan, to listen, i. e. to attend to low whispering or rustling sounds. In the same way Da. knittre, to rattle, crackle, knistre, to crackle, titter, may be compared with gnistre, ON. gneista, to sparkle. The Fr. éclater is used with reference to both senses. Éclat, a clap, crack; éclat de lumière, a glimpse or flash of light; éclatant, crashing, cracking, ringing, glittering, flashing.—Cot.

Gloaming. AS. glomung, glommung, twilight, the time of day when the light shines obscurely beneath the advancing shade of night like fire under ashes. Da. dial. glomme, to glow, to begin to burn or shine; Swiss glumsen, G. glimmen, glummen, to burn in a covert way, to glow under ashes. Da. glimte, to gleam; Pl.D. gliemken, to peep, to dawn.

Scarcely had Phoebus in the gloaming East Yet harnessed his fiery-footed team.—F. Q.

Ultimately from the figure of sound, signified by forms like Swiss glumsen, to rumble, ON. glumra, glymja, to clank.

To Gloat.—Glout. To look fixedly, from desire or absorption in thought. G. glotzen, formerly to shine, then to look fixedly, to stare; Sw. dial. glotta, glutta, to peep.

Glomerate. Lat. glomus, a ball of thread; glomero, to wind into a ball, to collect into a mass.

* Gloom.—Glum.—Glumpy. To glome, to look gloomy, to frown.—B. 'Whereas ye sat all heavy and glommyng!'—Chaloner. Glumping, surly, sulky; glum, a sour cross look; sullen, gloomy, overcast.—Hal. Da. dial. glummende, scowling; Sw. dial. glamma, to stare fixedly. The sense of silence is often expressed (with ellipse of the negative) by words signifying muttering, uttering a low sound. Thus Lat. musso, primarily to mutter, signifies to be silent, not to speak out; G. mucken, to utter a slight sound, is explained to show one's ill-will by a surly silence, to scowl. The words at the head of the article seem to have a similar origin. AS. clunian, to murmur, mutter, and thence to keep silence. 'Gif bisceopas clumiath mid ceaflum thær he sceoldan clipian' : if bishops mutter with their jaws (i. e. keep silence) where they ought to speak out.—Bede. Clumiend, murmurans.—Lye. Chaucer uses clum, as we do mum, by way of an interjection exhorting to silence.

They sitten still well nigh a furlong way, Now Paternoster, clum, seide Nicholay, And clum quoth John, and clum seide Alison.
Miller's Tale.

N. klumme, klumsa, to strike dumb, to take away the power of speech by fear or magic.

From simple silence to the scowl of ill-will is an easy step.

She looked hautelý, and gave on me a glum.
There was among them then no word but mum.
Skelton.

Thus from N. klumsa, speechless, we pass to Lincoln clumpse, reserved, forbidding; NE. glumpse, sulkiness. 'He did not tell me, and he's a clumpse man, I should ha' been skarr'd to ask him.'—Ralf Skirlaugh, ii. 86.

The trouble of mind which hinders speech is then, contrary to the usual course of metaphor, transferred to the material world, and the word gloom or glum applied to the thickness which disturbs the transparency of air or water.

Pl.D. glum (of liquids), thick, turbid.

In the same way louring, properly signifying frowning or scowling, and Sw. mulen (from mule, the chaps, snout), chapfallen, sad, gloomy, are applied to gloomy, overcast weather.

To Glop.—Gloppen. To glop, to stare; to gloppen, to frighten, to feel astonished.

Thou wenyst to glopyn me with thy grete wordes.
Morte Arture in Hal.

ON. glúpa, N. gláapa, to stare, gaze, gape. Hence ON. glópr, glappi, fatuus, E. glouping, silent or stupid, to be compared with glout, to stare at, to pout, look sulky, as gloppen with glotten, startled, surprised.—B. See Gloat, Glout.
Glory. Lat. gloria signifies fame, but the E. glory has quite as much reference to visible splendour as to spoken renown. ON. glora, to glitter. See Glare.
Gloss. Lustre. ON. glossi, blossi, flame, brightness; glossa, blossa, to blaze, sparkle, glow. Sc. to gliss, to cast a glance with the eyes. See Glass.
Gloss.—Glossary. Gr. γλῶσσα, the tongue, a language, a special word, whence glossarium, a dictionary.
Glove. ON. glofi.
To Glow. See Glede.
Glue. Fr. glu, birdlime; W. glud, tenacious paste, glue. Lat. gluten, glue. The fundamental idea is shining, then slippery, slimy, tenacious, gluey. Sc. gleit, gle'ft, to shine, glid, glad, glaid, Pl.D. glett, slippery. ON. glæta, wet. Fr. glette, E. dial. glut, phlegm, slime; Sc. glidder, slippery, gludder, to do dirty work; to gloit, to work in something liquid, miry, or viscous. Lith. glittus, smooth, slippery, slimy, sticky. Compare also Gr. γλίαχρος, slippery, tough, glutinous; γλοιός, slippery, nasty, clammy.
Glum. See Gloom.
To Glut.—Glutton. The sound of swallowing is represented by the syllables glut, glop, glup, gluk, gulp, gulk, giving Lat. glut-glut, for the noise of liquid escaping from a narrow-necked opening; glutire, to swallow; Fr. glout, ravenous, greedy; W. gloth, glwth, gluttonous; Cat. glop, a mouthful; N. glupa, gloypa, to swallow, eat greedily; Sw. glupsk, ravenous; E. glubbe, to swallow up, glubber, a glutton; gulp, gulk, gulch, glutch, to swallow.—Hal. Fr. glouglouter, to guggle, sound like a narrow-mouthed pot when it is emptied.
Glutinous. Lat. glutinosus, from gluten, glue, paste.
To Gnarr.—Gnarled. To gnarr or gnerr, to growl, snarl, grumble. ' Better is a morsel of bread with joy than a house full of delices with chiding and gnerring.' —Chaucer. Du. gnorren, knarren, knorren, grunnire, fremere, frendere, to growl, snarl; Sw. knarra, to creak; knorra, to murmur, growl, Dan. knurre, to growl, to purr as a cat. Then, because a body spinning rapidly round makes a whirring sound while the string to which it is suspended knots and twists, Sw. knorla, to twist, to curl; E. gnarr, a hard knot in a tree—B.; gnarled, knotted. I gnarre in a halter or corde, I stoppe one's breath or snarle one : je etrangle.—Palsgr. In the same way Pl.D. snarren, snirren, snurren, to whirr; snarre, a spinning-wheel; Sw. snorra, to hum like a top, purr, sound the r strongly, also to whirl, to turn; E. snarl, to make a grumbling sound, to make knots like an overtwisted cord. Dan. kurre, to coo; kurre, a knot or tangle in thread. Sw. dial. korra, to grumble, purr, whirr, to roll up, to twist, snarl (of thread).
To Gnash.—Gnast. From a representation of the sound made by the clapping of the teeth. Fin. naskata, to clap or knap the teeth; naskia, to smack the jaws, as a pig in eating; Da. gnaske, knaske, gnidske, Sw. gnissla, to crunch, gnash, grind the teeth; Du. knasschen, knaspen, knarsen, knarren, to gnash; G. knastern, knattern, to crackle, rattle. OE. gnaste, to gnaste, or gnasshe with the teeth, grincer.—Palsgr. in Way. ON. gnista t'önnum, to gnash the teeth.
Gnast or Knast. The wick or snuff of a candle. Lichinus, gnast of the candell, candell weyke; gnast, knast, emunctura.—Pr. Pm. Your strengthe shall ben as a gnast of a flax top (favilla stupæ—Vulg.)—Wicliff. In the latter version gnast is replaced by deed sparke, or deed sparcle.—Way. I should without doubt refer it, with Way, to O'S.gneisti, a spark, were it not for the Pol. knota, the wick or snuff of a candle, Lith. knatas, wick. Thus the OE. gnast, or knast, may probably be identified with Pl.D., Da. knast, a knot, knag, gnarl in wood, originally signifying (like wick) a knot or tuft of fibrous materials dipped in grease. See Knot.
Gnat. Sw. knott, gnadd, a midge. From the humming sound with which it signals its attack. Sw. knota, to murmur, grumble. N. gnette, knetta, to crackle, rustle, give a faint sound. Dæ gnatt ikje 'ti'naa, there was not the least sound from him. G. mücke, a midge, stands in the same relation to mucken, synonymous with N. gnette. Nicht einen muck von sich geben, not to give the least sound.
To Gnaw. ON. gnaga. Da. gnave, G. nagen, Du. knagen, knauwen, to gnaw. To naggle, to gnaw.—Hal. From the sound of the teeth against a hard substance. Fin. nakkia, G. knacken, to rap. The same sound is also represented with a final f or b, t or d. G. knappen, to crackle, gnaw, eat; knaupeln, to gnaw a bone, Du. knabbelen, to gnaw, gnash, E. nibble; Fin. napista, leviter crepo, inde murmuro (knarren, murren); natista, to sound like gnawing mice; natustaa, to gnaw; G. knattern, to crackle; Da. gnaddre, to grumble.
Gnostic. Gr. γνωστικός, possessing the faculty of intimate knowledge, from γιγνώσκω, to know.
To Go.—Gang. ON. ganga, perf. geck, hefi gengid; N. ganga, gaa, to go on foot, walk. G. gehen, gegangen, Da. gaen, to go.
Goad. Properly a rod. Goad, an ell English.—B. See Gad.
Goal. Gael, geal, white, anything white, a mark to shoot at. The Gael, however, seems an unlikely source for a word of this nature, nor does it appear that the mark in shooting was ever known by the name of goal in E. A more plausible origin may be suggested in It. galla or gala, a bubble; stare a galla, to float, and metaphorically to prevail, to get the upper hand, to carry the day. The Fr. avoir le gal is used in precisely the same meaning (Trevoux), and the expression was introduced into E. as to get the goal. 'There was no person that could have won the ring or got the gole before me.'—Hall. Rich. III. It is obvious from the form of the expression that neither in E. nor in Fr. was retained any consciousness of the original image, but the expression being specially applied to success in an athletic contest, such as racing or football, the term gal or goal seems by a literal interpretation to have been affixed to the boundary or standard the attainment of which was the test of victory. Fr. gal, the goal at football.—Trevoux. On the other hand comp. Lith. gálas, end, extremity, aim; ende, zweck, ziel; Let. gals, end, point, extremity.
Goat. ON. geit, a female goat; geit-hafr, a male goat.
Gob.—Gobbet. See Gobble.
To Gobble. 1. To make the guttural cry of the turkey-cock; to gabble, chatter. Cat. parlar a glops, to hurry out one's words.
2. To swallow hastily, from the noise of swallowing, as guttle, guzzle, guggle, Fr. godailler, from other representations of the same sound. In Fr. degobiller, Du. gobelen, ON. gubba, to vomit, the term is applied to the upward instead of downward gush. In these imitative forms the position of the liquid is very variable, and it is easily lost or inserted, as we have often had occasion to see. Thus gobble is related to gulp, as G. schwappeln to Du. swalpen (Kil.), to dash or splash, E. wamble to walm, spatter to spurt, &c. Another arrangement gives E. dial. glubbe, to suck in, to gobble up (Hal.); Cat. glop, a gulp, draught, sup, mouthful of liquid.
The same idea is conveyed by Fr. gob; avaler tout de gob, to swallow at a gulp. 'The little land he had—the lawyer swallowed at one gob.'—Barry in R. Fr. gober, to gobble, gulp down, eat greedily. From the image of gobbing or gulping is taken a designation for the throat, mouth, chops.
Fr. Prendre un homme au gobet, to take him unawares, properly, to seize him by the throat. E. gob, an open or wide mouth.—B. Gael, gob (contemptuously), the mouth; Pol. gęba. Boh. huba, the mouth, chops; Illyr. guba, snout.
Again, we have Fr. gobet, a mouthful, E. gob, gobbet, a lump, bit, morsel.
He gaping wide his threefold jawes All hungry caught that gobbet.—Phaer.
Gubs of gold.—Bale. To work by the gob, by the piece or job.—Hal.
It must be observed however that in the Walloon of Mons gob is a stroke or blow (a notion often connected with that of a lump), and also a bit or lump. Baye m'ein eingob, give me a bit. Gob d'homme, a stump of a man. Chaucer speaks of a gobbet of St Peter's sail. 'Gobbets of wood.'—Burnet. It. gobbo, a hump or hunch.
Goblet.—Gotch. Fr. gobeau, a vial, or strait-mouthed vessel of glass, a great goblet; gobelet, a goblet, or wide-mouthed bowl to drink in.—Cot.
The names of vessels for containing liquids are often taken from the image of pouring out water, expressed by forms representing the sound of water guggling out of the mouth of a narrow-necked vessel. Thus It. gozzare, to revel, properly to guzzle, Swiss götscheln, to plash, sound as water shaking in a vessel, are connected with It. gozzo, a cruse, any glass with a round body and long narrow neck (Fl.), and E. gotch, a large pitcher—Hal.; Fr. godailler, to guzzle, or make good cheer, Swiss gudeln, gutteln, to guggle, sound as water in a vessel, with Fr. godet, a jug. It. gotto, a pot, or drinking-glass; and perhaps Swiss guggeln, to guzzle, E. guggle, with E. jug. So also Hesse klunker, a narrow-mouthed flask, from the clunking sound. 'Bauculum, ein ghuddorf, quod effundendo sonitum facit, dass glünckelt.' 'Guttrof, ein geschirr das unten weit und oben eng ist—die da kuttern, klunckern, oder wie ein storch schnattern wenn man drauss trincket.'—Kurhess. Idiot. In the same way Fr. gobeloter, to guzzle or tipple, gobelet.

gobeau, a drinking-glass, and possibly Bret. gob, cop, a cup, seem connected with E. gobble, representing the sound of liquids in the throat. The OE. jub, a jug, shows the change of the initial g to j, as in jug, compared with guggle.
Goblin. Fr. gobelin, a Hobgoblin, Robin goodfellow, Bug.—Cot. The Goblin was generally conceived as a supernatural being of small size but of great strength, dwelling underground in mounds or desert places, not generally ill-disposed towards man, and in some cases domesticated with him and rendering him service. Hence the frequent addition of a familiar appellation, as in Hob-goblin, Hob-thrush.—Cot. in v. Lutin. It was known in Germany by the name of Kobold, and was supposed particularly to frequent mines, being thence called Berg-geist, Berg-männchen, or Mine-spirit, Mine-dwarf. Another German name is Matthew Kobalein, equivalent to E. Hob-goblin. The Goblin is mentioned by Ordericus Vitalis, ' Daemon enim quem de Dianæ fano expulit adhuc in eadem urbe degit, at in variis frequenter formis apparens neminem lædit. Hunc vulgus gobelinum appellat.' He is known in Brittany by the name of gobilin, and is there also supposed to engage in household drudgery like Milton's Lubber-fiend, to curry the horses of a night, for instance. It is among the Celts probably that the origin of the name is to be looked for. The Welsh appellation is coblyn, properly a knocker, from cobio, to knock, to peck; coblyn y coed, a woodpecker. An explanation of the name is given in a passage which is the more satisfactory from the fact that the writer seems to have no idea of any connection between the word goblin and the superstition he is describing. ' People will laugh at us Cardiganshire miners,' says a correspondent quoted in ' Bridges' Guide to Llandudno,' ' who maintain the existence of knockers in mines, a kind of good-natured impalpable people, not to be seen, but heard, and who seem to us to work in the mines. The miners have a notion that these knockers or little people, as we call them' (compare G. berg-männchen— Adelung), 'are of their own tribe and profession, and are a harmless people, who mean well.' ' He said that the lad had a great faculty—he could hear the knockers. The what? asked Anna. The knockers, repeated he, for the Welsh fancy that they hear the spirits of the ore at work in the yet unopened mine.'—Mrs Howitt, Cost of Caergwyn. It will be observed that the Kobold in Germany is peculiarly a miner's superstition, while Cardiganshire has been a mining district from the times of the Romans. From his knocking propensity the Kobold is sometimes called Meister Hämmerling.
God. G. gott; Pers. khoda.
Gog.—Goggle. To gog, cog, jock, jog, shag, shog, are parallel forms expressing motion brought to a sudden stop. See Cog. Gog-mire, a quagmire, or shaking bog. Gael. gog, nod; gogach, nodding, wavering; gog-cheannach, nodding, tossing the head in walking; gog-shuil, a goggle-eye, a full rolling eye.—B. To goggle is thus like coggle or joggle, to be unsteady, to roll to and fro. ' Then passid they forth boystly goglyng with their hedis.'—Chaucer, Prol. Merch. 2nd Tale. Swiss gagen, to rock, gageln, to joggle. As such expressions as twitter, chitter, signifying a broken, tremulous sound, are applied to a tremulous motion, so it seems the representation of a broken sound, the separate elements of which are of a jarring nature, are applied to a rougher and more disjointed movement. Bav. gagkern, to cluck like a hen, to stutter, stammer; Sw. gaggi, the clucking of a hen, gigagen, to hihaw, bray like an ass. In the same way are related Bav. gigken, to make inarticulate noises, giggle, stutter, and gigkeln, to palpitate, shiver, tremble.
Goit.—Gote.— Gowt. A ditch or sluice.—Hal. A mill-stream or drain. Du. gote, G. gosse, a kennel, conduit, spout, sink. ' One of the numerous cases in which there has been an interchange of an initial d and g. Prov. doit, Fr. doit, doiz, Mid.Lat. doitus. ' Concessi dictis fratribus stagnum de Placeio et nemus, cum terra quæ est per duos doitos usque ad molendinum de Placeio, sicut doitus exit de valle de Tesneres.'—Carp. Lang. goussa and doussa, to give a douche. See Dock.
Gold. ON. gull, gold, gulr, yellow.
Golf. A Scotch game in which a ball is driven by blows of a club. Du. kolf, a club; speelkolf, a bat to drive a ball; kolfbal, a ball used in such a game.
Gondola. It. gondola, dim. from gonda, a small boat, which in its turn is from Gr. κονδυ, a drinking-cup.
Good. G. gut, Gr. ἀγαθός.
Gool.—Gully. A ditch, trench, puddle.—B. Gully-hole, a sink. Swiss gülle, mist-gülle, a puddle, the drainings of a dung-heap. Du. Gulle, palus, vorago.

gurges.—Kil. Limousin gooullia, gaoul-lio, a puddle. From the sound of water guggling or splashing. Fr. dial, gouiller, to splash, dirty ; gouillat, a puddle ; goule, a throat (Jaubert) ; goulot, the pipe of a sink or gutter. See Gullet.
Goose. See Gander.
Gooseberry. Corrupted from G. kraus-beere, krausdbeere (otherwise stachel-beere), Du. kroes-, kruys-, kroesel-besie, Lat. uva crispa, from the upright hairs with which the fruit is covered. G. kraus, crisp, Du. kroesen, kruysen, to curl, the notion of curly and of bristly hair being commonly expressed by the same term. Compare It. riccio, a curl, also the bristly husk of a chesnut ; arricciarsi, to stand on end.
The form kroesel-besie gives rise to Mid. Lat. grossula, crosella, Fr. groiselle, gro-selle.
The idea of an undulating, curly sur-face is commonly expressed by the figure of a broken, quivering sound. Fr. gre-ziller, to crackle, shrivel ; Prov. grazillar, to twitter ; G. kräuseln, to trill, quaver, warble, also to curl. See Curl, Frizzle.
Gorbelly. A glutton, or greedy fel-low.—B. AS. and N. gor, filth ; in N. also applied to the half-digested food in the stomach of a ruminating animal, or generally the contents of the intestines ; gorvaamb, the first stomach of a rumin-ating animal ; gorkaggje, gorpose (a gore-tub, or gore-sack), a gluttonous, lazy fel-low ; gora, to stuff oneself. E. Gorcrow (a consumer of gore, or filth), ON. gorbor, a raven.
Gore. I. Clotted blood.—B. AS. gor, wet filth, mud, dung, blood ; N. gor, wet mud ; gorbotn, a muddy bottom ; gormyr, a soft swamp of mere mud. OHG. horo, mud, oose ; horawig, muddy, dirty.
Gore. 2. To Gore. Gore, the lap or skirt of a garment ; a pointed piece let in-to a garment to widen it. The Du. gheere was used in both these senses ; gheere, gheerene, lacinia, sinus vestis, limbus, et pars qua largior fit ves-tis.—Kil. It. gherone, the gusset, gores of a shirt or smock, side-pieces of a cloak ; also the skirts of a coat.—Fl. Fr. giron, the lap or bosom.
The original meaning seems to be a point or corner, then the corner of a gar-ment, lap, corner-shaped piece let in to a garment. Compare Lap. skaut, a point ; aksjo-skaut, the point of an axe ; skautek, pointed, angular ; ON. skaut, lap, lappet, skirt, identical with G. schoos, bosom. The sense of point is preserved in AS. gar, ON. geir, a spear, or javelin ; N. gare, garre, a point, peak, sharp stalk of grass or heath. Hence E. gore, to pierce, transfix with a pointed instrument as a spear or the horn of an animal, now almost confined to the latter application. Fin. kairi, a borer, also a gore or angular piece in a garment. AS. navegar, an in-strument for boring, where the sense of piercing is expressed by the syllable gar, the former part of the word being ex-plained under Auger.
Gorge. Fr. gorge, a throat ; It. gorgo, a gurgle, a bubbling or swallow of waters, a gulph, whirlpool, a roaring noise, or vehement boiling of waters, a spout or gutter—Fl. ; gorgoglio, a gargling or rat-tling in the throat ; gorgare, gorgheg-giare, to gurgle with violent boiling, to purl and bubble. Obviously from a re-presentation of the gurgling or guggling sound made by the motion of air and water intermixed. Lat. gurges, a whirl-pool. Arab. gharghara, a gargle, rattle in the throat. Esthon. kurk, G. gurgel, the gullet, throat. Closely allied to a series of forms in which the r is replaced by an l, gulch, gulp, gulf, gully, &c.
Gorgeous. Fr. gorgias, gourgias, gawdy, flaunting, sumptuously clothed ; glorying or delighting in bravery, also proud, lofty, stately, standing on his pan-tofles.—Cot. Se gorgiaser, to flaunt, to be proud of the bravery of his apparel. Probably a metaphor from the strutting self-importance of a peacock or turkey-cock. So from jabot, the craw, faire jabot, se glorifier, faire l'orgueilleux.—Dict. du bas Langage. In the same way se rengorger, to bridle, to hold back the head and thrust forwards the throat and chest (gorge) ; to play the important, affect an air of pride. So G. brüsten, properly to hold up one's breast, figuratively to be proud, to be pompous, to bridle up oneself. Sich auf etwas brüsten, to be proud of a thing. Bohem. hrdlo, the neck, throat ; hrditi se, hrdnauti, to be proud, to be puffed up, to strut.
Gorgon. Gr. Γοργώνες, Lat. gorgones, the three daughters of Phorcys.
Gormandise. Fr. gourmand, a glut-ton. The verb must have signified to eat greedily, though only preserved in Rouchi gourmer, to taste wine, Sp. gor-mar, to vomit. Compare Du. gobelen, Fr. degobiller, to vomit, with E. gobble, to eat voraciously. Gourmouylha, gour-mouira, to make a noise with water in rincing the mouth.—Dict. Castrais.
Gorse.—Gorst. A prickly shrub, the growth of waste places. From W. göres, gorest, waste, open. A gorsty bit, in the Midland counties, is a piece of ground overgrown with furze. Limousin gorsso, place covered with stones and brambles; degourssa, to clear land for cultivation. Bret, lann, gorse; lannou (in the pl.), waste places. In the Fr. parts of Brittany the plant gorse is called lande, the name given to the barren, shrubby plains about Bordeaux.

Goshawk. A hawk used in the chase of geese. G. ganseadler, goose-eagle. 'Auca, gos; aucarius, gos-hafuc'—Gl. Ælfr.

Gospel. AS. Godspell; ON. guds-spiall, the word of God. Goth, spillon, to tell; AS. spell, ON. spiall, discourse, tidings.

Gossip. Godfather or godmother, related in the service of God. AS. sib, peace, alliance, relationship; sibscipe, Du. sibbe, gesibbe, G. sippschaft, relationship; ON. gudsifiar, spiritual relationship. At the present day the word is hardly used except in the sense of familiar chat, tattle, the most familiar intercourse. So Fr. commère, godmother of one's child, or fellow-godmother, also a tattler, gossip; commérage, tattling, gossip. Die alberne weibertratcherei dieser gevat-terinnen : the silly tattle of these gossips.—Sanders. Pol. kum, godfather; kumac sie, to live on the most familiar terms.

Gossamer. Properly God-summer. Prestis crowne that flyeth about in sommer, barbedieu.—Palsgr. G. der sommer, fliegende sommer, sommer-fäden (summer-threads), Marien faden, Unsrer lieben frauen faden, from the legend that the gossomer is the remnant of our Lady's winding-sheet, which fell away in fragments when she was taken up to heaven. It is this divine origin which is indicated by the first syllable of the E. term. In like manner the Lady-cow is in Brittany la petite vache du bon Dieu, in G. Marien-käfer, or Gottes kühlein.

Gotch. An earthenware drinking vessel with a belly like a jug. It. gozzo, a glass with round body and narrow neck; gotto, a drinking-glass. See Goblet.

Gouge. Sp. gubia, Fr. gouge, a hollow chisel. Pol. kopać, to dig, hollow, scoop out.

Gourd. Lat. cucurbita, Fr. cougourde, gourde.

Gout. From gutta, a drop. A remnant of the medical theory which attributed all kinds of disorders to the settling of a drop of morbid humour upon the part affected; of which we preserve another instance in the gutta serena, or loss of sight without visible affection of the eye. The Sp. has gota arterica, or gout, disease of the joints; gota caduca, the falling sickness, or epilepsy; Du. goete, the palsy.

Govern.—Governor. Fr. gouverner, Lat. gubernare.

Gown. It. gonna, W. gwn, a gown; gwnio, to sew, to stitch.

To Grab.—Grabble. A large number of words are found in English and the related languages, apparently springing from the root grab, grap, graf, with senses having reference to the act of seizing or clutching. To grab, to seize; to grabble, to handle untowardly, to feel in muddy places—B. ; 'Grabling in the dark without moonlight through wild olive-trees and rocks.'—North's Plutarch in R. To the same class belong grapple, gripe, grasp, grope. Sw. grabba, to grasp, Du. grabbelen, to seize greedily, to scramble for; Lith. grebti, to seize or grasp at anything; graibyti, to feel, handle, feel for; greblys, a rake; Illyr. grabiti, to rake, to rob; grebsti, to scratch, scrape, comb wool. Pol. grabić, to seize, to rake, grabki, a rake, or fork; Bohem. hrabati, to rake or scrape; Russ. grablit', to pillage, steal; G. grappeln, grapsen, to grope; It. grappare, to seize greedily upon, grapple, or catch with a hook; graffiare, to hook, scratch, scrape, gripe. Goth, greipan, ON. greipa, Dan. gribe, G. greifen, to seize; Dan. greb, a dung-fork; Fr. griffe, claw. The radical image seems the sound of scraping or scratching, suggesting the idea of scraping together, obtaining possession by violent means, seizing. Hence a designation is found for the instruments of scratching or clutching, claws, hooks, forks, rakes, and thence again are formed verbs expressing the actions of such implements. Lat. crepare, to creak; Ptg. carpir, to cry, to scrape; ON. skrapa, to creak, grate, jar, skrafa, to sound as dry things rubbed together; N. skrapa, Dan. skrabe, to creak, make a harsh grating noise; Pol. skrobać, to scrape, to scrub. Bret. skraba, to steal; skrapa, to clutch, to seize, to rob; krafa, krava, to scratch, to seize; krapa, to hook, to seize by violence; W. krafu, to scrape; Lang. grapa, lightly to scratch the earth; Gr. γράφειν, to write (properly to scratch); Gael. gràbh, sgriobh, write; sgriob, scrape, scratch, comb; N. grava, to scrape, to rake together; G. graben, to grave (i. e. to scratch) in stone or metal, to dig.
Grace. Lat. gratia, from gratus, pleasing; It. aggradire, to please. Lith. gražus, fair, agreeable; gražilas, ornament. Gael. gradh, love, fondness; gradh-ach, lovely, dear; A graidh, my dear.
Grade.—Gradient.—Gradual. Lat. gradus, a step, gradior, to advance by steps.
Graff.—Graft. Fr. greffe, a slip or shoot of a tree for grafting; Du. greffie, a cutting either for grafting or setting in the ground, also a style for writing. From Lat. graphium, a style, or pointed instru-ment for writing on waxen tablets. ' Gra-phium vel scriptorium, græf.'—Gl. Ælfr. In like manner Sp. mugron, a sprig or shoot of a vine, from Lat. mucro; Mod. Gr. κεντρίφια, a graft, κεντρόνω, to graft, from κέντρον, anything pointed. Grafting was often called the penning of trees.
Grail.—Greal. The San-greal (saint-greal, the holy dish) was the dish out of which our Lord ate at the Last Supper, and in which Joseph of Arimathea caught his blood at the crucifixion.
• Yet true it is that long before that day Hither came Joseph of Arimathey, Who brought with him the holy grayle they say, And preacht the truth.—F. Q. in R.
Lang, grazal, grezal, a large earthen dish or bowl, bassin de terre de grès. Grais, grès, potter's earth, freestone. Prov. grasal, grazal; 'un grasal ou jatte pleine de prunes.'—Raynouard. Grais or grès seems the Latinised form of the Breton krâg, hard stone; eur pôd krâg, un pot de grès. So N. gryta, a pot, from griot, stone.
Grain. Scarlet grain or kermes is an insect found on certain kinds of oak, from which the finest reds were formerly dyed. The term grain is a translation of Gr. κόκκος, given to the insect from its re-semblance to a seed or kernel, whence the colour dyed with it was called κόκκινος, or in Lat. coccineus, as from kermes, the oriental name of the insect, It. carmesino, crimson. The term grana is applied in Sp. as well to the dye itself as to the cloth dyed with it, and also metaphorically to the fresh red colour of the lips and cheeks. Hence probably the grain of wood or of leather, the ornamental appearance of the surface dependent on the course of the fibres. The grain of leather is the shining side, in Fr. grain, or fleur de cuir; fleur in the sense of brilliancy, lustre. The Sp. tez is explained by Neumann grain.
GRANGE shining surface, bloom of the human face. No doubt the term may have its origin in the finer or coarser grains of which stone is composed, and the expression may have been transferred from stone to wood and leather, but the former explanation appears to me most probable.
Grains. Brewers' Grains. See Drain.
The Grains. A harpoon, fork for striking fish. Dan. green, branch, bough, prong of a fork. Sc. grain, grane, branch of a tree, or of a river, prong of a fork. Illyr. grana, a branch, an arm of a river. See Groin.
-gram. Gr. γράφω, originally only to grave or scratch, then to write or draw; γράμμα, what is written or drawn, a letter, a writing or drawing. Hence Anagram, a writing whose let-ters are to be made up again (in a differ-ent order); Epigram, a short writing on a subject; Diagram, a figure, plan, what is marked out by lines; Telegram, what is written from afar.
* Gramary, Magic.—Jam. Fr. grimoire; mots de la grimoire, conjuration, exorcisms.—Cot.
Perhaps from Fris. grijmme, nacht-grijmme, ghost, bugbear; grijmmerye (spookerij, bang-makerij), ghost-walking, terrifying.—Epkema. And probably the appellation arose from the roaring noise made by the person representing a ghost for the purpose of striking terror. AS. grimetan, to roar; Fr. gribouillis, the rumbling of the bowels, gribouri (as G. polter-geist), a rumbling goblin; Sw. dial. grimi, noise, disturbance, bluster. Fris. grijmgruwle, terror. "But grimoire may merely signify gibberish, the unin-telligible mutterings of the conjuror, as E. grimgribber, the technical jargon of a lawyer.—Hal.
Grammar. Fr. grammaire, Prov. gramaira for grammadaria, from Lat. grammaticus, Gr. γραμματικός.—Sch.
Grampus. From Lat. grandis piscis, or perhaps crassus piscis, Fr. gras pois-son, as porpesse from porcus piscis. ' There we saw many grandpisces or herringhogs hunting the scholes of herrings.'—Josselin, 1675, in Webster. 'Le flet et le pourpeis et l'estourgeon et le poisson qui est nommé crassus piscis.'—Metivier, translation of the Tablier de Fecamp, 1216.
Granary.—Granulate. Lat. grana-rium, granum.
Grand. Lat. grandis, large, plentiful.
Grange. A barn, receptacle for grain or corn, then the entire farm. Mid.Lat. granea, granica, a barn, from granum, corn. 'Si enim domum infra curtem incenderit, aut scuriam (écurie) aut graneam vel cellaria.'—Leg. Alam. in Diez. 'Ad casas dominicas stabulare, fenile, grani-cam.'—Leg. Baiuw, ibid. From the first of these forms It. grangia (a barn for corn, a country farm—Fl.), Fr. grange; from the second the OFr. granche, in the same sense. Fr. granger, grangier, a farmer. Da. lade, a barn, is applied, as E. grange, to the farm belonging to a monastery.
To Grange. To truck or deal for profit. 'The ruffianry (brokerage) of causes I am daily more and more acquainted with, and see the manner of dealing which cometh of the Queen's straitness to give these women, whereby they presume thus to grange and truck causes.'—Birch. Mem. of Q. Eliz. in R.
From grange, a farm, Sp. grangear, to farm, till, and thence to gain or acquire; grangeo, gain, profit.
Granite. A kind of stone formed of grains of different minerals compacted together. It. granito, kernelly or corny, as honey, figs, soap, or oil in winter; also a kind of speckled stone.—Fl.
Grant. Much difficulty is thrown on the etymology of this word by the concurrence of forms which can hardly be traced to a common origin.
From Lat. gratus is formed It. grado, Prov. grat, Fr. gré, will, liking, consent, and thence It. gradire, aggradare, aggra-dire, Fr. gréer, agréer, E. agree, to ap-prove, allow, give consent to. In Mid. Lat. gratus, or gratum, was used as a substantive; 'sine gratu meo,' without my consent. 'Idem feodum a manu mo-nachorum alienare non possumus nisi grato et voluntate Ducis Burgundiae.' 'Nos dedimus in alio loco praedicto Bal-duino excambium illius terrae ad gratum suum,' to his satisfaction. The insertion of the nasal converted gratum into gran-tum, in the same sense. 'Et si non pos-sim warantizare dabo ei escambium alibi ad suum grantum et valitudinem illius terrae,' to his satisfaction according to the value of the land. 'Ad grantum et vo-luntatem Archiepiscopi Remensis.' Fa-cere gratum and facere grantum, or gra-tificare, are found indifferently in the sense of making satisfaction. 'Et si de-bitor inventus fuerit in civitate antequam gratum suum fecerit, tamdiu tenebitur in carcere donec redimatur de centum solidis —tum jurabit se non reversurum in dic-tam civitatem donec fecerit gratum ma-joris et creditoris,' until he shall have made satisfaction to the mayor of the town and the creditor. 'Solvat dominis decem libras vel alias gratificet cum eis,' or otherwise come to agreement with them, make satisfaction to them. 'Icel-lui Guillame compta et fit gré a l'oste de l'écot de lui et ses compagnons,' satisfied the host for the scot of him and his com-panions. 'Faciemus vobis grantum nos-trum de dictis mille et quingentis marchis et tenebimus ostagia apud Leydunum donec integre de dictis 1500 marchis fuerit satisfactum:' where facere grantum is obviously to make satisfaction by actual payment of the money.
We have next the verbs gratare, gran-tare, gratificare, Fr. gréer, in the sense of doing an agreeable thing, bestowing a gift, making over an interest, assenting to an arrangement. 'Quia illud dictis ab-bati et conventui gratavi et in verbo veri-tatis concessi.' 'Ego in bono proposito et sano concessi et gratatus sum praecep-tori et fratribus militiae Templi unum sestarium mestillii.' 'Item nos episcopus supradictus grantamus, laudamus, com-mittimus et concedimus domino comiti in feudum.' The corresponding terms in French are 'loons, gréons, approuvons.'
If the foregoing forms had stood by themselves, the derivation from gratus would not have been doubtful, but paral-lel with these are found graantum (ad suum graantum, to his satisfaction—Carp.), graantagium (Fr. granteis, pay-ment, satisfaction—ibid.), Fr. craanter, creanter, creancer, to promise, engage for, to bind oneself, créancie, créanche, creant, crant, assurance, contract, engagement, obligation. Now it is hardly possible that grant could be converted by mere corruption into graant, creant, the double a in the OFr. being an almost certain sign of the loss of a d, as in aage from edage, caable from cadable, baer, beer, from badare. On this principle Fr. cré-ance would be the equivalent of a Lat. credentia, trust, confidence, assurance. 'Ego B. archiepiscopus accipio te Ray-mundum in fide et credentia mea loco sacramenti.'—Chart. A.D. 1157, in Carp. OFr. craant, believing. 'Sire si com c'est voirs et s'en somes craant.'—Roquef. The Bret. cred, the root of credi, Lat. cre-dere, to believe, is used in the sense of assurance, obligation, security, créance, caution, garant.—Legonidec. The pro-nunciation of the N. of France, which regularly changes an initial gr into cr (converting gras, grappe, grand-dieu, into cras, crappe, crand-dieu—Hécart), would leave so little difference between granter, to confer an advantage, from gratus, and creanter, to assure, from credere (both used with equal frequency in legal instruments in the act of transferring a right), that it is not surprising if the two were confounded. We find accordingly the g of gratus united with the act of creanter, and gratare, grantare, used in the sense of creantare. 'Super istas pactiones omnes sæpe nominati Domino de Legniaso graantaverant (engage, pledge themselves) quod tenebunt, &c.' 'Præmissa omnia ac singula immobilia tenere et fideliter adimplere promiserunt et grataverunt.'

Grape. Fr. grappe de raisins, a bunch of grapes ; It. grappo, a seizing ; dar di grappo, to seize ; grappa, the stalk of fruit, the part by which it is held ; grappare, graspare, to seize, grappola, a handful, as much as one's hand can grasp at once, grappo, graspo, grappoto, graspolo, a bunch of grapes. See Grab.
Graphic. -graph. Gr. γράφω, I write, inscribe ; γραφή, a drawing, writing ; γραφικός, suited for writing.
Grapnel. A small anchor composed of hooks turned in opposite directions. Fr. grappil, grappin, the graple of a ship.—Cot. See Grab.
To Grapple. It. grappare, aggrappare, to clutch, to grapple ; dar di grappo, to seize. See Grab.
To Grasp. It. graspare, to grasp, to grapple. Bav. raspeln, raspen, to scrape. 'Immerzu auf einer Saiten raspen,' to be always scraping on one string. Also to scrape together, to grasp. 'Sie raspen das nie ihr ist in ihren sack,' they scrape into their sack that which is not theirs. Swab. raspen, to pluck, to gather. Hrespan, colligere, vellere ; gahresp, prædia (for præda).—Schm. Sp. raspar, to rake, scrape, to steal. See Grab.
Grass, AS. gærs, gras, Du. gars, gras, grass ; grase, groense, groese, the green sod, cespes gramineus.—Kil. The N. gras applies to every green herb ; gras-bruni, a nettle ; gras-gardr, a kitchen-garden. There can be little doubt that the word is from the same root with grow, of which also Lat. gramen is a participial form. Du. groese, vigour, growth, increase ; Dan. grøde, vegetation, growth.
Grate. A frame composed of bars with interstices. Lat. crates, It. grata, grate, a grate, hurdle, lattice. Lith. kratas, krotas, a grate, grated window ; Pol. krata, grate, lattice. See Crate.
* To Grate. It is probable that grate, as applied to scraping nutmeg or ginger, is directly taken from Fr. gratter, to scratch, scrape, rub, the equivalent of G. kratzen, ON. krassa, to scrape or tear. On the other hand grate, expressing harsh sound, would seem to be a development of the root gar, kar, representing sharp sound, as shown in Lat. queror, to lament, G. guarren, to cry, MHG. kerren, querren, to give a sound, to cry, to creak like a wheel ; Swab. garen, garren (knarren), to creak ; Sp. chirriar, to creak or chirp ; E.-jar, to sound harshly ; Lat. garrire, to chirp, to chatter. The addition of a frequentative termination is shown in Bav. garrezen, Lesachthal gerrazen, guerrazzen (D. M. ii. 346), to creak ; MHG. grâzen, to cry harshly. 'Man hôrte diu ors dâ lûte grâzen.' ON. gráta, to cry. Walach. cârti, to creak as a wheel.
Grateful.—Gratitude.—Gratify. Lat. gratus, pleasant, acceptable, gratitudo, the emotion of a thankful spirit ; gratificor, to do what is agreeable or obliging. Grateful presents an instance of an E. suffix attached to a purely L. word. See Grace.
Grave.—Gravitation. Lat. gravis, heavy, weighty, severe.
Grave. A burying-place. G. grab, Du. graf, grave, Pol. grób, grave, tomb. Lith. grabas, a coffin, grabe, grova, a ditch. Du. grave, a ditch, furrow, anything dug, a spade ; graven, to dig. See Grab.
To Grave. Fr. graver, to carve ; G. graben, Du. grave, to carve, to dig. Compare Bret. krof, krav, scratch, and (with inversion of the vowel) AS. ceorfan, to carve.
* Gravel. It. gravella, gravel, sand, grittiness, also the gravel in a man's bladder or kidneys.—Fl. Fr. grave, greve, sand or gravel, a sandy shore ; gravelle, gravois, gravier, small gravel, sand ; gravelle, tartar, the stony sediment that forms in wine. The analogy of G. graus, rubbish, fragments ; gries, gravel, chips of stone (from grieseln, to fall in small particles), leads to the suspicion that Fr. grave, gravier, gravel, corresponds to G. graupe, graupel, Holstein gruben, gruven, crushed corn, pearl barley, anything in small lumps as hail, &c., from graupeln, to fall in particles, corresponding to Pol. kropić, to fall in drops, kropla, kropka, a drop, a dot, Russ. kropliu, I sprinkle, Serv. kroplenje, sprinkling. Krupór, grots, pearl barley. Krupy padają, it falls in grains,

It is a hoar frost. It. grebare, to rammel, rubble [i. e. to fall in ruins]; grebáno, rubble, stones of ruinous walls.—Fl. Let. graut, to fall in dust and rubbish; grub-buli, grubbuli, rubble, broken ruins of walls. Lith. gruwu, grusti or gruti, to fall in ruins; gruwus, ruinous.

Graves.—Graving-dock. Graves, the dregs at the bottom of the pot in melting tallow. To grave a ship is to smear the hull with graves (for which pitch is now substituted), and a graving-dock is a dock from which the water can be let off in order to perform that operation. Sw. ljus-grefwar, tallow graves; Pl.D. grebe, greve, G. gruben, grieben, griefen, OHG. griebo, griubo, 'quod remanet in patella de carnibus frixis.' Apparently from OHG. grieben, greuben, graupjan, to fry, to melt in a pan. 'Frixare, grieben, rosten; frixus, geschmelzt, gegreubt;' 'cacraupta frixam.'—Gl. in Schm. Giroupit, groubit, friget—gigroubit, olio frigatur—kacraupit, frixum.—Graff. Griupo, G. grapen, a pan.

On the other hand the radical signification may be lump, separate bit, from the same root with G. graupen, small lump, hail, grain, Russ. krupa, grits, krupitzui, crums, Serv. krupitza, bit, fragment, Illyr. krupa, krupitsa, hail, grits, grain. See Gravel. OG. gräbelein, small bits of bread fried in grease (Schm.), would square with either derivation. In the glossaries cited by Dief cadula is rendered smalz-grieffe, -grib, -croppe; bringing us to Yorkshire craps or tallow-craps. Cracoke (crawke or crappe, H. P.), relefe of molte talowe or grese.—Pr. Pm. Bav. griegken, graves. The hard skin of roast pork scored in lines is called crackling, and the same term is given in Scotch Acts to the refuse of melted tallow.—Jam.

* Gray. ON. grár, AS. græg, Pl.D. graag, graag, Du. grauw, grouw, gray. Gr. γραῦς, γραῦς, γραῖα, an old woman. The Graiai, according to Hesiod, were so called from being born with gray hair. OHG. gráw, grá, canus, griseus, anilis. Fris. gravelgrau, gray; gráveling, twilight, the gray of the evening; Dan. grævling; Du. grevel, grevinck, Sw. gräfsvin, a gray or badger, as Fr. grisard, ixomgris, gray.

The original meaning is probably particoloured, as seen in Fr. grivelé, speckled, black and white, or dun and white (Cot.); whence grive, E. dial. gray-bird, a thrush, from its speckled breast. So also, in the same way that we speak of taking something down in black and white for committing it to writing, Fr. grivelée, a scroll or schedule.—Cot. Doubtless also it is from its particoloured face that the badger is called gray, as the general colour of the fur is not more gray than that of the rabbit or hare.

It is remarkable that there seems to be a connection between Du. graauw, grouw, gray, and grouwen, to shudder (Kil.), graauwen, to snarl or growl (Bomhoff), as between grijs, gray, and grijsen, to snarl, grijzjen, grijzelen (Epkema), G. grausen, to shudder; and this widespread relation leads to the supposition that gray and grijs, Fr. gris, are radically connected.

It is shown under Grisly that the radical sense of grizzled or gray is dusted or powdered over, and as grizzled and Fr. gris are from gresiller, to fall in powder or small particles, so perhaps gray may be explained from Let. graut (where the t is only the sign of the infinitive), to fall in dust or ruins, whence grühbulis, grubbuli, rubbish, fragments. Lith. gruwu, grusti or gruti, to fall in ruins; gruwus, ruinous. See Gravel.

To Graze. To scratch, to rub, to pass along the surface; Lang. grata la terre, to scratch the ground, to skim over the surface (effleurer).

Grease. It. grascia, grassa, grease; Fr. gras, fat; graisse, grease; Gael. creis, grease, tallow. Lat. crassus, thick, fleshy, fat.

Great. G. gross, Du. groot.

Greaves. Armour for the leg. Fr. greve, the shin, shin-bone; grevure, wound on the leg.—Pat. de Champ. Sp. grevas, greaves.

Greedy. Goth. gredags, hungry; properly crying for food.
Papelotes [pap, gruel],—to aglotye with here gurles, That greden after fode.—P. P.—to satisfy their children that cry after food. In like manner G. begierig, desirous, greedy, may be explained from gieren, which, according to Japix, is used in Friesland in the sense of crying.

Green. The colour of growing herbs. ON. græ, at groa, to grow, to flourish; grænn, green. Du. groeyen, to grow; groen, green. In like manner Lat. virere, to flourish, viridis, green. Lith. zdalas, green, zelti, to become green, to sprout, grow.

To Greet. Du. groeten, grueten, to salute, also to irritate or provoke, to accuse.—Kil. OHG. grosjan, gruozjan, irritare, provocare, salutare. w. gresaw, a welcome.
-greg-. Lat. grex, gregis, a flock, herd; as in Egregious (taken out of the com- mon herd, select, excellent), Congregate, &c.
Grenade.—Grenadier. Fr. grenade, a pomegranate, also a ball of wild-fire made like a pomegranate.—Cot. An iron case filled with powder and bits of iron, like the seeds in a pomegranate.
-gress. Lat. gradus, a step ; gradior, gressum, to step, to go. Aggression, Congress, Progress, &c.
Greyhound. ON. grey, grey-hundr, a bitch.
Grid-iron.—Griddle. w. greidio, to scorch or singe ; greidyll, a griddle, an iron plate to bake cakes on, gridiron, bakestone ; Gael. gread, burn, scorch ; Sw. grådda, to roast, bake ; grådd-panna, a frying-pan.
The terms for roasting, broiling, frying are commonly taken from the crackling sound of the grease dropping in the fire. Fr. greziller, to crackle as flesh on coals, to frizzle, grediller, to frizzle, crumple, or pucker with heat.—Cot.
Grief. Fr. grief, aggrievance, oppres- sion, trouble ; grever, to oppress, over- charge, disquiet.—Cot. It. gravare, to aggrieve, oppress. From Lat. gravis, heavy. We speak of heavy-hearted, heavy in spirit. ' And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and very heavy.'
* Grig. A word only known in ordi- nary speech in the proverb, As merry as a grig. It is used provincially in the sense of a grasshopper or cricket. Ten- nyson in ' The Brook ' speaks of ' high- elbowed grigs that leap in summer grass.' And this is undoubtedly the sense which the word bears in the proverb, the cricket or grasshopper from their lively chirp having always been taken by the writers of fable as the type of a careless, joyous life. ' Up bounded the long line of Otando men to the rescue, laden with provisions and as merry as crickets.'—Du Chaillu, Ashango, p. 154. AS. græghama (the gray-coated), a cricket, grasshopper. ' Fugelas singeth, gylleth græghama '— birds sing, the cricket chirps.
Grill. Cold, shivery.
While they han suffred cold full strong, In wethers grille and derke to sight.—R. R. In the original, par le froid et divers temps. Du. grillen, to shiver ; grillig, frilleux, shivery, grillig weer, cold, raw weather.
The origin is the representation of a crackling or chirping sound by Fr. gre- siller, grisler, griller, to make a noise like broiling meat, or the note of a cricket. From the notion of a broken or quaver- ing sound we pass to that of a quivering movement in Fr. griller, Du. grillen, to shiver, or tremble ; griller d'impatience, to tremble with eagerness.
To Grill. Fr. griller, to broil. From the noise of frying or broiling. See last article and Brilliant.
Grimace. Fr. grimace, a crabbed look, wry mouth. The noises made by an angry animal are represented by the syllables gram, grim, grom, which are thence applied to the various expressions of anger, vexation, ill-temper ; Du. grim- men, to snarl, grin, cry, make faces, pucker up the face, wrinkle.—Kil. It. grima, wrinkled.
* To Grime.—Begrime. Sw. dial., N. grima. Da. grime, a spot or streak of dirt on the face, ON., AS. grima. Da. grime, a mask (a blackened face) ; grim, griim, soot; grime (Moth). Du. griemen, gremen, begremen, begremelen (Kil.), begrommelen, to blacken, begrime, spot ; gremel, Fr. grimaillé (Jaubert), spotted, multicoloured; Sc. grummel, Sw. grums, grummel, dregs, grounds, mud ; grumla, to make thick, to trouble ; ON. gróma, filth, dirt ; It. groma, gromma, scurf or dirt that sticks to anything, slime of fish, crust that forms in wine vessels, roughcast on a wall, dregs or mother. The radical image may be the sprinkling or powder- ing over, letting fall in small particles, as shown in the case of Grisly. A griming of snow or of ashes is a sprinkling. Fr. gremiller, to crumble ; gremille, grou- millon, groumignon, a crum, clot, single berry ; grume, grime, one of a bunch of berries—Jaubert ; grume, a grain ; gru- mel, a pellet.—Roquef. Lat. grumus, a little heap. E. crum, crim, a small bit.
To Grin. The representation of the sounds expressive of ill-temper gives rise to a series of forms of much general re- semblance. Du. grimmen, griisen, griin- sen, to grin, snarl, grind the teeth, wry the mouth, cry; grinnen, grinden, to grin, or snarl; grijnen, to grumble, grijnig, ill- humoured ; N. grina, to wry the mouth, curl the nose, griinall, sour-looking, harsh, raw (of the weather). Fr. gronder, grogner, to snarl, scold, grumble, groncer, to roar as the sea, grincer, to grind the teeth ; It. grignare, to snarl as a dog, to grin. Lat. ringi, to snarl, to be angry, to grin, or open the lips, whence rictus, the open mouth, gaping jaws.
To Grind. The primary sense of the word is in all probability the grinding of the teeth, regarded as a symptom of ill-temper, and designated by representations of the snarling sounds of an angry animal. Du. grimmen, grinnen, grinden, ringere, hirrire.—Kil. But perhaps the long i of grind brings it nearer Du. grijsen, grijnsen, ringere, fremere, frendere (Kil.), with the corresponding Fr. grincer, to grind the teeth. G. griesgram, grumbling, out of temper. From grinding the teeth the term is transferred to the breaking small by a mill. In these imitative words the interchange of an initial fr and gr is very common. So Lat. fremere, to murmur, grumble, rage at, corresponds to Du. grimmen, as Lat. frendere, to gnash the teeth, also to grind or break small, to E. grind. See Grist, Grum.
Grip.—Groove. Du. gruppe, grippe, groeve, a furrow, ditch, groove, gruppel, greppel, a little ditch, kennel. G. grube, a pit, ditch, hollow dug in the ground, from graben, to dig. See Grab, Grub.
Gripe. Du. grijpen, G. greiffen, to seize ; Fr. griffe, claw, talon, griffer, gripper, to clutch or seize ; It. graffiare, to scratch, scrape, hook, gripe ; grifo, a gripe, claw, or talone, grifare, to clutch. See Grab.
Grisly, 1. Frightful, horrible, what causes one to shudder. G. dial. grauen, grausen, gräsen, griesen, grieseln, gruseln, grisseln, grosseln, Fris. grese, Sc. grise, 'growe, groose, to shudder ; E. dial. grow, growze, to be chill before an ague fit.—Hal. Grysyl, horridus, terribilis.—Pr. Pm. G. grässlich, Fris. grislik, terrible.
The radical image is the rustling sound made by the continued fall of a number of small particles, whence the signification passes to the idea of drizzling, trickling, shivering. Sc. grassil, grissel, girssil, to make a rustling or crackling noise ; Fr. greziller, to crackle ; gresiller, to hail, drizzle, sleet, reem to fall.—Cot. ' There was a girstlin of frost this morning ' (Jam.), i. e. a sprinkling. G. grieseln, to fall in small particles, to trickle, and thence to shudder, which is felt like a trickling or creeping over the skin. Gruselen, formicar cutis.—Stalder. ' Eine geschichte die uns eine gänsehaut über den rücken grieseln lässt.' ' Dass mir's durch die haut grässelt'—Sanders. In the same way AS. hristlan, to rustle, is connected with G. rieseln, to make a rustling sound, to trickle, to fall in small particles as snow, hail, sand, to shudder. ' Das seinem alten zuhörer ein schauder über die haut rieselte'—which made a shudder creep or trickle over his skin. Sw. rysa, to shudder ; ryslig, horrible.
Grisly, 2, or Grizzly.— Grizzled. Speckled, of mixed colour, of mingled black and white. G. greis, an old man, gray ; Du. grijs, Fr. gris, It. griso, grigio, gray. We have explained in the last article the origin of G. grieseln, gruseln, to fall in morsels or small particles, Fr. gresiller, to drizzle, reem to fall ; gresillé, drizzled on, covered or hoar with reem.—Cot. To this last exactly corresponds E. grizzled, applied to what has the appearance of being powdered or covered with small particles. So Fr. cendré, gray, as if powdered with ashes. Swiss grieselet, griesselig, grainy, lumpy ; griset, grisselet, grieselet, speckled.
Grist. Grain brought to a mill to be ground. Fr. gru, grus, grut, grust, grain either for grinding or for making beer. Le suppliant conduisit une charretée de grain ou gru pour mouldre au moulin.—MS., A.D. 1477, in Duc. Hensch. In the same sense grust, A.D. 1383. Sometimes the word has the sense of bran. The grinding of corn is taken from the grinding or gnashing of the teeth, and in the same way grist, corn to be ground, seems properly to signify grinding. Grist, to gnash the teeth—Hal. ; grist-bat, gnashing of the teeth.—Layamon. Pol. grysd, to gnaw, nibble ; Du. krijsselen, krijsseltanden, to grind the teeth.
Gristle. Universally named from the crunching sound it makes when bitten. AS. grystlan, Du. krijsselen, krijssel-tanden, E. dial. grist, to gnash or grind the teeth ; Pol. grysd, to gnaw. Swiss krospelen, to crunch ; krospele, gristle. Du. knospen, gnarsen, to gnash ; knospelbeen, gnarsbeen, gristle. So we have Boh. chraustati and chraustácka, Illyrian herskati or herstati and herskav, herstav ; Magy. porczogni, to crackle, porcz, gristle; Alban. kërtselig, I crunch, kertsc, gristle.
Grit. Sand, or gravel, rough hard particles.—Webster. AS. greot, sand, dust. Thu scealt greot etan, thou shalt eat dust. ON. grjot, stones ; N. grjot, stone, pebble ; Sw. dial. grut, griud, gravel, particle, small bit ; Da. dial. gryt, a small bit, trifle ; Sc. grete, sand, gravel ; MHG. griez, griuz, grain of sand, gravel, least bit ; Lang. grut, a single berry, a grain. ' N'a un grut :' he has a grain of it (of folly).—Dict. Castr. AS. 'nan grot andgytes : ' not a particle of understanding.—

Boethius. Pl.D. grut, gruus, rubbish, fragments; grut un murt, what is broken to pieces. Du. grut, trash, refuse. Lith. grudas, a grain of corn, pip of fruit, drop of dew, morsel of something to eat; Let. grauds, a grain. Gr. γρύτη, Lat. gruta, scruta, trash, frippery, seem to come from the same source.
It is shown under Grisly that from the representation of a rustling sound are formed Fr. gresiller, to drizzle, to fall in reem or hail, G. gruseln, grieseln, to fall in small particles, to trickle down, and from the same source are doubtless Let. graut, Lith. gruti, grusti, to fall in dust and ruins. From these verbs must be explained G. graus, Let. grausli, rubble, fragments, Swiss griesel, drift of fallen stones, G. gries, griess, coarse sand, gravel, Du. gruts, gries, dust, sand, gravel, Sw. grut, gravel, coarse sand, rubble, rubbish, Pol. gruz, rubbish, rubble, gruzla, clod, clot, Fr. grus, skinned grain, gruel.—Cot. It is a slight modification from the final s of grus, gries, to the t of grit, grot, grut; and the same variation is found in the representative forms at the root of the entire series. Cot. gives gretiller, as well as greziller, to crackle. E. dial. crottles, crumbs, also the pellety dung of the rabbit, hare, goat, seems to be named from its pattering down in separate particles. Northampton grittle, to crumble off, pairs off with G. grieseln. 'The dirt grittles from your shoes.' In the same way we have Sc. driddle, Sw. dial. drettla, to spill or to let fall in small portions, alongside of E. drizzle.
Grits.—Grots or Groats. Du. grut, gort, G. Grütze, Pol. gruca, Lith. grucze, Lang. gruda, grain husked and more or less broken, or sometimes the food prepared from it. The formation of the word may be illustrated by Lang. grut, a single berry, a grain of anything, whence gruta, gruda, to pick the grapes from the stalks; gruda also, as Da. dial. grotte, grutte, to grain corn, i. e. to grind off the skin, leaving the eatable grain alone. Lang. gruts, grains of maize so treated. See Grit.
The same connection between the designation of a grain or of grits or ground corn, and of gravel or small stones, is seen in N. grjóti, food prepared of corn or meal, gruel, Sw. gryn, grits, groats, Swiss grien, pebbles, gravel.
Groan. Directly imitative. Du. groonen, gemere. W. grwn, a broken or trembling noise, a groan, the cooing of doves; grwnan, to make a droning noise, to hum, murmur. Fr. gronder, to snarl, grunt, groan, grumble. Prov. gronhir, gronir, Fr. grogner, to mutter, murmur.
Groat. Pl.D. grote, originally grote-schware, the great schware, in contradistinction to the common or little schware of which there were five in the grote.—Brem. Wtb.
Grocer. Fr. grosserie, wares uttered, or the uttering of wares, by wholesale; marchant grossier, one that sells only by the great, or utters his commodities by wholesale.—Cot.
Grogram. Fr. grasgrain (coarse-grain), a kind of stuff.
Groin. 1. The snout of a swine. From the grunting of the animal. It. grugnire, grugnare, to grunt; grugna, grugnala, snout of a pig; Prov. gronhir, Fr. gragner, grongner, OE. to groin, to grunt; Fr. groing, groin, snout; E. dial. grunny, snout of a hog; gruntle, muzzle.
The gallows gapes after thy graceless gruntle. Dunbar.
Metaphorically OFr. graing, cape, promontory, tongue of land jutting into the sea.—Roquef. Hence E. groin, a wooden jetty built into the sea for the purpose of letting the gravel accumulate against it for the defence of the coast.
From the same source is the old name of 'The Groin,' erroneously supposed to be a corruption of Corunna.
Portum Verrinum sic intravere marinum. [Vocatur le Groyne, et est in mare ut rostrum porci ubi intraverunt terram.]—Polit. Poems, Cam. Soc. 112.
Betwix Cornwall and Bretayne He sayllyt; and left the grunnyie of Spainye [i. e. Corunna] On northalff him; and held thair way Quhill to Savill the Graunt cum thai. Barbour.
2. Groin, formerly more correctly grine, the fork of the body, as Fr. fourchure, a fork-like division, the part of his body whence his thighs part.—Cot. Dan. green, branch of a tree, prong of a fork; Sw. gren, branch, arm of a stream, the fork of a pair of trowsers; grena sig, to fork, or separate in branches; rida grensle, enfourcher un cheval, to ride astride. Sc. grain, grane, branch of a tree or a river.
In the same way Lap. suerre, the branch of a tree or of a river, also the groin.
Groom. Du. grom, a youth.—Kil. Grome, grume, a lover, a warrior, and like puer in Lat. and garçon in Fr. it is also used for servant.—Jam.
Every man shall take his dome As well the mayster as his grome.—Gower.

Fr. gromme, serviteur, voiturier; gromet, grometel, serviteur, garçon de marchand ou d'artisan.—Roquef. In modern E. it is appropriated to a servant attending on horses. In our old Parish Registers it is sometimes used for bachelor or unmarried man. ON. gromr, homuncio.—Egills. A parallel form with Goth. guma, OHG. gomo, OE. gome, man. OSax. brudigumo, E. bridegroom.

Groove. Du. groeve, a furrow, ditch, pit; G. grube, a pit, hole, grave, from graben, pret. grub, to dig. See Grab. Du. groeven, to engrave, hollow out.

Grope. To feel with the hands. Lith. grebti, to grab (greifen nach etwas), to seize, graibyti, to grab, handle, grope. Cat. grapas, claws, hands; a quatre grapas, on all fours. See Grab.

Gross. Thick, coarse. Lat. crassus, Fr. gros.

A Gross. The great hundred of twelve dozen.

Grotto.—Grotesque. It. grotta, a cave, den, cellar.—Fl. Fr. dial. crotter, to dig, encrotter, to bury—Vocab. de Berri; crotton, pit, little hole—Pat. de Champ.; crotton, a dungeon.—Roquef. From the sense of scratching, expressed by grat (Fr. gratter, to scratch), as G. grab, grube, E. grave, from the same sense expressed by grai.

Grotesque is the style in which grottoes were ornamented.

Ground. Goth. grundus (grunduvaddjus, ground-wall, foundations); ON. grunnr; Lith. gruntas; Pol. grunt; Gael. grunnd.

Group. It. gruppo, a knot or lump of anything. W. crwb, crob, a hunch.

Grouse. Otherwise called the grey-hen. From Fr. griais, griesche, speckled, grey. Poule griesche, a moor-hen, the hen of the grice or moor-game.—Cot.

Grout. ON. grautr. Da. gröd, Du. gruyte, gorte, E. grout, gruel, properly consisting of grots boiled with water, but often of meal and water. The word is then applied to other matters of similar consistency, especially to thin mortar poured in between the joints of stones for the purpose of solidifying a structure. See Grits.

Grouts. Now commonly called grounds, the dregs of tea or coffee. N. grut, dregs; grutot, grouty, muddy; Du. grute, gruyte, dregs—Kil.; grut, refuse, trash, what is cast out as small and useless; Gael. gruid, dregs. A parallel form with Du. gruis, rubble, fragments, chips, bran; Pl.D. gruus, rubbish, coarse sand, broken stone; steen gruus, rubble of old walls; teegruus, the grouts or spent leaves of tea.—Schütze. Grout-ale, poor ale run from the grouts or grains of the first brewing.—Hal. See Grit.

Grove.—Greve. Greaves, trees, boughs, groves.—Hal.

So gladly they gon in greves so green. Sir Gawaine and Sir Gal. in Jam.

AS. graef, a grove.

Grovelling.—Grouf. Sc. on groufe, agruif, flat, with the face downwards.

Agruif lay some, others with eyes to skyes. Jam.

Sterte in thy bed about full wide And turn full oft on every side, Now downward groufe and now upright [i. e. with face upwards].—R. R.

The addition of the adverbial termination ling or lings, as in darklings, blindlings, &c., gave groflings, face downward.

Therfor groflynges thow shalle be layde Then when I stryke thow shalle not see. Towneley Mysteries.

Grovelynge or grovelyngys, adv. resupine —Pr. Pm.

Horman translates with slepynge grovelynge by pronâ infaciem dormitione.

The ON. has â grufu corresponding exactly to on groufe, agruif, above mentioned. At falla, liggja, &c., â grufu, to fall, lie, &c., face downwards. It has besides the verbs grufa, grufla, to bend down the head, lie face downwards, to scramble on all fours.—Fritzner.

The radical image is shown in It. gruffare, grufolare, to grunt, [and thence] to grub or root up the ground with the snout as a hog doth.—Fl. Hence grifo, the snout, and E. grovel, grubble, to work with the snout in the ground.

Okemast and beech and cornel mast they eate Grovelling like swine on earth in foulest wise. Chapman.

Whoever tasted lost his upright form And downward fell into a grovelling swine. Comus.

To grub is to root in the ground like a pig, and in Suffolk to lay a child grubbling is to lay it face downwards.—Moore.

Again, the image of a pig rooting with the snout gives Dan. dial. grue (of a ploughshare), to dig its nose into the ground. ' Skaret gruer ikke nok:' the point of the share is not enough bent downwards. At ligge paa gru or nase-gruus, to lie groveling.

To Grow. 1. ON. groa, Du. groeyen, to grow, flourish, heal.

2. To grow, to be troubled.—B. To grow or gry, to be aguish; grousome, fearful, loathsome.—Hal. Dan. gru, horror, terror, grue, to shudder at; G. grauen, to have a fear united with shivering or shuddering; Du. grouwen, gruwelen, gruwen, to shudder at. Perhaps from the connection between vibration and sound. Fris. grouweti, grouweljen, to thunder—Epkema; Lith. granju, grauti, to thunder; Illyr. gruhati, gruvati, to boom like cannon, to resound. The Fris-grouweljen leads to Fr. grouivr, grouiller, to rumble, also to move, stir, scrall. Pl.D. grulen, to shudder at, to have horror of. Fr. (Jura) grouler, to shiver.—Hécart. A shuddering is like a creeping over the flesh. The growing or grauling of an ague is the shuddering or creeping feel which marks the approach of the fit. Another synonymous form is growze, to be chill before the beginning of an ague fit (Hal.), corresponding to G. grausen, as grow to G. grauen, to shudder. The growing or grauling of an ague is the shivering which marks the first approach of the fit.

Growl. A muttering, snarling sound. Rouchi grouler, to grumble, mutter, rumble; N. gryla, to grunt, growl, bellow; Gr. γρυλλίζω, to grunt; Fr. grouller, grouiller, to rumble.

Grub. The origin of this word may perhaps be illustrated by It. gargogliare, to rumble or growl in the bowels, to bubble, boil, purl, or spring up as water, also to breed vermin or wormlets; whence gorgoglio, gorgoglione (Lat. curculio), a weevil breeding in corn. The root, representing a broken confused sound, is applied to an object in multifarious movement, as boiling water, then to the general movement of swarming insects and to an individual insect itself. Lang. gourgoulia, Fr. grougouler, grouiller, grouller, to rumble or croak as the bowels, the two latter also to move, stir, swarm, abound, break out in great numbers; grouillis, a stirring heap of worms; It. garbuglio, Fr. grabuge, a great stir, coil, garboil, hurly-burly, gribouiller, to rumble; Pl.D. kribbeln, to simmer, to bubble up, to stir, crawl, be in general motion; G. kriebeln, to swarm, crawl; grübeln und grabbeln, to be stirring and swarming in great multitudes, as maggots or ants.—Kütn. Hence E. grub, a maggot, as It. gorgoglio, from gorgogliare.

* To Grub. To dig up something buried in the ground, as the stumps or roots of trees. Yorks. grab, to probe, to examine, as the hand dives into the corner of the pocket—Whitby Gl.; to grobble (often pronounced as groffle or gruffle), to poke about as with a stick in a hole, to feel about among a number of things for one in particular.—Cleveland Gl. Grubbare in the erthe or other thynggys (grovblare, H. growblar. P.), fossor, confessor; grubynge (grublyng, H. growblinge. P.), confossio.—Pr. Pm. ' He looked at the fish, then at the fiddle, still grubbling in his pockets.'—Spectator. Pl.D. grubbeln, grabbeln, grawweln, to feel over with the hand, to grope about, to grub in the dirt. There may perhaps here be some confusion of forms from different roots, and grub may be from the same source with grovel, to root as swine, an act which affords a most familiar image of grubbing up. The final b appears in Suffolk grubblins, for grovelings, or face downwards, and in Sw. dial. grubbla, to mutter, compared with It. grufolare, to grunt or root as swine.

Grudge. Grutchyn, gruchyn, murmuro.—Pr. Pm. Fr. gruger, gruser, to grieve, repine, mutter—Cot.; groucer, grouchier, groucher, to murmur, reproach, complain. ' No man was hardi to grucche (either to make pryvy noise, mutire—Vulg.) agenus the sones of Israel.'—Wicliff in Way. Gr. γρύζειν, to say γρυ, grumble, mutter; μηδὲν μήτε γρύζειν, not to let a syllable be heard. Then, as grumbling is the sign of ill-temper, to grudge, to feel discontent; grudge, ill-will. The It. cruccio, coruccio, Fr. courroux, wrath, has the same origin, although much obscured by the insertion of the long vowel between the c and r. Fr. courechier is found exactly in the sense of E. grudge. That never with his mowthe he seide amys Ne groched agens his Creatour iwis, [sa bouche n'en parla un seul vilain mot encuntre son Creatour.] And like in the same manere tho Suffrede Nasciens bothe angwische and wo— And nevere to his God made he grochchenge, Nethir for tormentis ne none other thinge. [tout autresi souffri Nasciens ses grans peines— assez en boin gre sans courechier ne à Dieu ne a autre.]—St Greal, c. 27, 63. On the same principle, G. groll, ill-will, spite, may be compared with E. growl. The grudging of an ague is a modification of the synonymous grouse, mentioned under Grow, 2; as Fr. gruger, of Pl.D. grusen, to crumble or break into small bits. I groudge as one dothe that hath a groudging of the axes, je frilonne et je fremis.'—Palsgr. in Way. See Grisly.

Gruel. Fr. gruau, gruant, oatmeal.

groats—Cot. ; gruel, gruez, meal.—Roquef. Bret, groel, gourel, groats ; w. grual, gruel. N. graut, Dan. grod, porridge ; Lang, gruda, husked oats or grain, more or less broken in husking ; gruda, to husk or pill grain, to pick grapes, skin beans, from gru, grut, a single berry, a grain.—Dict. Castr. Lith. grudas, a grain of corn, pip of a fruit, drop of dew. See Grits.

Gruff. Churlish, dogged.—B. Properly hoarse in tone. To gruffle, to growl.—Hal. Grisons grufflar, to snore. To gruff, to express discontent or vexation—Atkinson ; to grunt, to snore.—Whitby Gl. It. gruffare, grufolare, grofolare, to grunt.—Fl. See Grim.

Grum.—Grumpy. E. dial, grum, grumpy, angry, surly, sulky—Hal. ; grum, sour-looked—B. ; AS. grom, grum, fierce. Da. grum, ferocious, atrocious. G. gram, trouble, sorrow ; grimm, wrath, rage ; grimmig, raging, stern, crabbed ; Gael. gruaim, a surly look ; gruama, sullen, gloomy ; Manx groam, a sad or sullen look. All from the expression of angry feelings by muttering or snarling sounds. Bav. gramen, to grind the teeth ; griesgramen, to murmur ; W. grem, murmuring, grinding the teeth ; grwm, a murmur, a growl (Spurrel). Du. grimmen, to snarl, growl, grin, grind the teeth, rage, cry ; grommen, Fr. grommeler, E. dial. grumph, to grumble, growl. Prov. grimar, to groan, sigh ; grim, morose, sad.

To Grumble. Fr. grommeler, Du. grommen, grommelen, to murmur, mutter ; Sw. dial, grubbla, grummsa, to mutter discontentedly ; W. grwm, a murmur, growl ; grymial, to grumble, scold. G. brummen, to growl or mutter, is a parallel form.

To Grunt. Lat. grunnire, Fr. grogner, grongner, G. grunzen, to grunt, growl, mutter ; Fr. groncer, to roar as the sea in a storm, gronder, to snarl, grunt, grumble.

Guard. Defence, protection. It. guardare, to look, guard, ward, keep, save, to beware ; Fr. garder, to keep, guard, watch, heed, or look unto ; garer, to ware, beware, take heed of.—Cot. The senses of looking after and taking care of or guarding against are closely united. ' Now look thee Our Lord.'—P. P. To look seems to have been the original sense of Lat. servare. 'Tuus servus servet Veneris faciem an Cupidini,' let your slave look.—Plautus. Serva! as Fr. gare ! look out ! take care ! For the origin of the word see Gaure.

Gudgeon. Lat. gobio, Fr. gouvion, goujon, a small slimy fish. Rouchi, Cha passe come un gouvion, that is easily swallowed. Faire avaler des gouvions, to make one believe a lie.—Hécart. Hence to gudgeon, to deceive, befool.

Gudgil-hole. A place containing dung, water, and any kind of filth.—Hal. Swiss Rom. guadzouilli, to dabble in wet.—Bridel.

Guerdon. Fr. guerredon, guerdon. It. guiderdone, recompense, reward. From OHG. widarlon, AS. witherlean, with a change from l to d, perhaps through the influence of Lat. donum. AS. wither, against, in return for, and lean, reward.—Diez.

Guess. Du. ghissen, to estimate, reckon, guess ; ON. giska (for gitska), N. gissa, Dan. gisse, gjette, Walach. gici (Ital. c), to guess, gicitoriu, a diviner, guesser. A frequentative from ON. geta, to get, conceive, think, make mention of (i. e. to pronounce one's opinion). At geta minni, in my opinion. Geta gods til, to augur well of.

Guest. Goth, gasts, stranger ; gastigods, Gr. φιλόξενος, hospitable ; G. gast, ON. gestr, Russ. gosty, Bohem. host, Pol. gost, guest. Lap. quosse, guest, quossotet, to entertain, quossot, to act as guest ; W. gwest, visit, entertainment, inn, lodging, gwestai, a visitor, guest ; Bret. hostiz, guest, host. The Lat. hostis, enemy, supposed to be connected through the sense of stranger, is probably from a different source.

To Guggle. Fr. glouglou, Mod.Gr. γλουγλου, guggling, the sound of water mixed with air issuing from the mouth of a vessel ; κουκλουκίζω, Swiss guttgeln, gunscheln, to guggle, güggeln, to tipple ; Pol. glukad, to rumble in the belly.

Guide.—Guy. It. guidare, Fr. guider, guier, exhibit the Romance form corresponding to G. weisen, Du. wijsen, Sw. visa, to show, direct, guide. G. jemanden zurecht weisen, to show one the right way. Sw. visa honom in, show him in. From G. weise, Du. wijse, ghijse, Bret. gis, kiz, W. gwis, Fr. guise, the guise, mode, way of a thing. See Guise.

Guild. Dan. gilde, feast, banquet, guild, or corporation ; Pl.D. gilde, a company, corporation, society of burghers meeting on stated occasions for the purpose of feasting and merrymaking. The primary meaning is a feast, then the company assembled, and the same transference of signification will be observed in the word company itself, which signi-fying in the first instance a number of persons eating together, has come to be applied to an association for any purpose, and in the case of the City Companies to the very associations which were formerly denominated Guilds.
It is a mistake to connect the word with the G. geld, payment. The real de-rivation is to be found in W. gwyl, Bret. goel, gouil, a feast, or holiday, gouélia, to keep holiday ; Gael, (with the usual change from the w. gw to f initial), feill, a feast, holiday, fair, or market ; Manx ealley, festival, sacred, hallowed. The Irish feil, or feighil, is explained the vigil of a feast, sometimes the feast itself, leading to the supposition that the word is a mere corruption of Lat. vigiliæ. But the W. and Bret. forms could hardly have been derived from that origin, and we find a satisfactory explanation in a native root, w. gwylio, to watch, be vigilant, to look for ; gwyled, to behold, to see, gwylad, keeping a festival, the notion of keeping or observing being commonly expressed by the figure of looking. Bret, gwel, look, sight, action of seeing. In a similar manner from wake, to be vigilant, to watch, we have the wakes, the festival of the patron saint, W. gwyl-mabsant, G. kirchweihe (weihen, to consecrate), where the ideas of waking or keeping and consecration or holiness are connected together in the same way as in Manx fealley.
The Du. form gulde, a feast (populare convivium), also a guild or corporation, closely resembles Goth, dulths, Bav. duld, a feast. Osterduld, Easter. In modern times duld is applied to a fair or market, commonly kept on the saint's day of the place. Dulden, like Bret, goelia, to so-lemnize. Tuldan, celebrare ; tultlih, so-lennis.—Kero in Schmeller.
Guile. OFr. guille, deceit, fraud ; Du. ghijlen, ludificare, fallere. — Kil. Pl.D. gigeln, begigeln, to beguile, properly to deceive by juggling tricks, from gig, ex-pressing rapid movement to and fro. See Gig, Dodge, Juggle. The same contrac-tion is seen in the parallel form wile, AS. wigele, from the notion of wiggling or vacillating. 'And wigeleth as fordruncen mon that haveth imunt to vallen.'—An-cren Riwle. AS. gewiglian, to juggle, conjure.
Guillotine. The well-known imple-ment said to be invented by Dr Guillotin in the French Revolution. It was however but the revival of a mode of execution formerly in use in Germany. Crusius, in his Swabian Chron. translated by Moser. 1733, says : ' Formerly behead-ing was not done in Germany with a sword, but with an oaken plank on which was a sharp iron. This plank was like a flogging-bench, had on both sides upright slides (grund-leisten), on which the plank was ; under that a sharp cutting iron. When the poor man was bound on the bench, as if for flogging, the executioner (truckenscherer) let fall the plank which hung by a cord, which with the iron struck off his head.'—Deutsch. Mundart. iv. 225.
Guilt. Properly conduct which has to be atoned for, which has to be paid for. Swiss gült, Dan. gjeld, debt. ON. gialld, debt, return of equivalent. In the same way Dan. skyld, debt, guilt, offence, G. schuld, a fault, guilt, crime, also a debt. AS. gildan, Dan. gielde, G. gelten, to re-quite, pay, atone, to return an equivalent. ' He ne meahte mine gife gyldan.' He could not requite my gift.—Caedm. Vor-let ous oure yeldinges, ase and we vorle-teth oure yelderes and ne ous led naȝt into vondinge ac vri ous vram queaδe—Paternoster in Dialect of Kent, 1340, in Reliq. Ant. p. 42.
Guise. Fr. guise, w. gwis, Bret, giz, kiz, equivalents of the G. weise, E. wise, mode, way, fashion. The word is very widely spread, being found with little alteration in form in the same sense in some of the Siberian languages. Wotiak kyzi, manner ; nokyzi, in no-wise. Other-wise we might find an explanation in the Bret, giz, kiz, the fundamental meaning of which seems to be footsteps, whence the sense of a track or way, mode or fashion, might easily be developed. Bret. mond war hé giz, to go back (literally to go upon his giz), can only be explained by giving to giz the sense of footsteps.
Guitar. Fr. guiterre, guiterne, a git-tern.—Cot. Lat. cithara, a harp.
Gules. Fr. gueules, red or sanguine in blazon.—Cot. From the red colour of the mouth. Gueule, the mouth, throat, gullet.
Gulf. It. golfo, a gulf or arm of the sea, a pit, deep hole, whirlpool.—Fl. Fr. golfe, a whirlpool or bottomless pit, also a bosom or gulf of the sea between two capes. — Cot. The G. meer-busen, Lat. sinus, bosom, gulf, would point to a de-rivation from Gr. κόλπος, of exactly the same meaning with Lat. sinus. But the sense of whirlpool, abyss, must be from Du. gulpen, golpen, E. gulp, to swallow ; ODu. golpe, gurges, vorago.—Kil.

truth appears to be that here, as in so many other cases where we are puzzled between two derivations, they may both be traced to a common origin. We have only to suppose that the meaning of κόλπος was originally the throat or swallow, then the neck, and was finally applied to the bosom in the same way that the neck is frequently made to include the bosom in common speech.

Gull. I. A sea-mew. It. gulone, w. gwylan, Bret. gwelan, from the peculiar wailing cry of the bird. Bret. gwela, N. Fris. gallen, to weep. E. dial, to gowle, to cry.
For unnethes is a chylde borne fully That it ne begynnes to gowle and cry.
Hampole in Hal. Gael. faoileann, faoilleag, a sea-gull.
2. A dupe. To gull, to deceive, de-fraud. A metaphor from the helplessness of a young unfledged bird, on the same principle that the Fr. niais, a nestling, is applied to a simpleton ; a novice, ninny, witless and inexperienced gull.—Cot. The meaning of gull is simply unfledged bird, in which sense it is still used in Cheshire.
As that ungentle gull the cuckoo's bird.—H. iv. It is especially applied to a gosling in the South of England.
'And verily 't would vex one to see them, who design to draw disciples after them, to lead a crew of gulls into no small puddles by having obtained the repute of being no meanly understanding ganders.'—Trenchfield, Cap of grey hairs, p. 8, 1671.
Probably from Dan. guul, Sw. gul, yellow, from the yellow colour of the down, or perhaps of the beak, as in Fr. béjaune, properly yellow beak, a young bird with yellow skin at the base of the beak, me-taphorically 'a novice, a simple inex-perienced ass, a ninny.'—Cot. It. pippi-one, a pigeon (properly a young bird, from pippiare, to peep or pip), metaphor-ically a silly gull, one that is soon caught and trepanned.—Fl. Hence a pigeon, a dupe at cards.

Gullet.—Gully. Fr. goulet, a gullet, the end of a pipe where it dischargeth itself, the mouth of a vial or bottle ; goulot, a pipe, gutter, E. gully-hole, the mouth of a drain where the water pours with a guggling noise into the sink ; Bav. güllen, Swiss gülle, a sink ; Champagne goillis, ordure ; Du. gullen, to swallow greedily, suck down ; E. gull, to guzzle or drink rapidly.—Hal. I gulle in drink as great drinkers do [swallow with a noise]. Je engoule.—Palsgr. 576. Swiss Rom. gollhi, gaula, to bedabble, bedrabble oneself, to wet oneself up to the knees, dirty the bottom of one's clothes, gollha, a puddle ; gotholli, gollotzi, guallotsi, to sound like fluid in a cask. Fr. goule, mouth, throat—Jaubert ; gouler, to flow—Pat. de Champ. ; goulée, goulette, a gulp or mouthful of wine ; goulicement, greedily, like a gully-gut ; Lat. gula, the throat. All from the sound of water mixed with air in a confined space. Sc. guller, buller, to make a noise like water forcibly issuing through a narrow open-ing, or as when one gargles ; to guggle.—Jam.

Gulp.—Gulch. Du. golpen, ingurgi-tare, avidè haurire.—Kil. Lang. gloup, a gulp or mouthful of liquid ; gloupel, a drop ; E. dial, gulk, to gulp or swallow. Da. dial, gvulpe, to make a noise in the throat in swallowing liquids. ' Han drikker saa det gvulper i ham.' N. gulka, Da. gulpe, to gulp up, disgorge, vomit, kulke, to gulp ; kulk. Fin. kulkku or kurkku, the gullet ; E. gulch, a gully or swallow in a river. All from a represent-ation of the sound made in swallowing liquid.

Gum. Lat. gummi, Gr. κόμμι, gum, the congealed juice of trees.

Gumption. Understanding, intelli-gence. From gaum, to observe, attend to, understand.—Atkinson.

* Gums. Du. gumme, G. gaumen, the palate ; Lang. goumé, a goitre or swelled throat. From Da. gumle, to mumble, Sw. dial, gummsa, gamsa, gemsa, gimsa, jamnda, jumla, to chew slow and with difficulty, probably, like the synonymous mumsa, mumla, E. mump, mumble, imi-tation of the sounds made in chewing like a toothless person with the lips closed.

Gun. The signification of the word at the earliest period to which it can be traced is clearly shown in the Practica of John Arderne, a surgeon of the time of E. III., cited by Way in Pr. Pm., who, after giving a recipe for a kind of 'fewe volant' consisting of charcoal, sulphur, and salt-petre, proceeds—' cest poudre vault a gettere pelottes de fer ou de plom ou d' areyne oue un instrument qe l'em appelle gonne.' The sense is marked with equal clearness where the word is used by Chaucer in the House of Fame,— Swift as a pellet out of a gunne When fire is in the pouder runne.
The ordinances of the household of E. III. which commence 1344, printed by the Ant. Soc., enumerate ' Ingyners 57, Artellers 6, Gonners 6.' It must be ob-served that the name is exclusively English, and it may well be that it appeared first in the designation of the gunner, from Fr. guigneur, an aimer with one eye, as a gunner taking his level; guigner, to wink or aim with one eye, to level at a thing winking.—Cot. Introduced into English, where it suggested no reference to the idea of aiming, the word would seem to be taken from the new-fangled implement which the gunner worked, and to which the name of gun would naturally be given.
Gunwale. Wales are outward timbers in a ship's sides on which men set their feet when they clamber up, and the gun-wale is the wale which goes about the uttermost strake or seam of the uppermost deck in the ship's waist.—Bailey.
Gurgeons. The siftings of meal. Fr. gruger, to granulate, crunch, crumble. Du. gruizen, to reduce to gruis, or small bits. Fr. grus, grits. See Grits, Grist.
Gurnard.—Gurnet. Fr. gournauld, grougnaut (Cot.), now grenaut, from grogner, to grunt, grumble. 'The Gurnet is known to emit a peculiar grunting sound on being removed from the water, to which disagreeable habit it owes its designation.'—N. & Q. Mar. 9, 1861. Another Fr. name is grondin. In Norway it is called knurrfisk, from Dan. knurre, to grumble, mutter; also hurr, equivalent to OE. whur, to snarl. Gronder, to whurre, yarre, grunt, grumble.—Cot.
To Gush. G. giessen, Du. gosselen, to pour; Swiss gusseln, to dabble in wet, to sleet; gusslig, muddy, thick (of liquids); gusslete, slosh, dirty mixture. E. dial. gushil, a gutter; gudgil-hole, a sink. From the sound of dashing water. I gowsshe, I make a noise as water doth that cometh hastily out: je bruis.—Palsgr.
Gusset. Fr. gousset, a fob or pocket, and thence the arm-pit, the piece of cloth or of chain mail which covers the arm-pit in a shirt or a suit of plate armour. From Fr. gousse, It. guscio, the pod or husk of pease, beans, &c.
Gust.—Gusto. Lat. gustus, taste, or the sense of it.
Gust. ON. gustr, giostr, a cold blast of wind, It. guscio di vento, agreeing with E. dial. gush, gussock, a gust.
Guts. Perhaps so named from the rumbling sound, as ON. bumbr, the belly, compared with bumba, to resound. ON. gutla, to sound as liquids in a cask.
His guts began to gothelen As two greedy sows.—P. P.
Swiss gudeln, gudern, to guggle, paddle, rumble in the bowels; güdel, the paunch. G. kutteln, guts, tripes, garbage; entkutteln, to gut. Pl.D. küt, guts, bowels; küt'n, to gut.—Danneil. Du. kuit, spawn or roe of fishes. Sc. kyte, the belly.
Gutta-percha. Malay gatta, gum.—Crawford.
Gutter. Fr. gouttiere, a channel or gutter; esgout, a dropping of water as from a house-eaves, also a little sink, channel, or gutter.
From the noise of water dripping, Pl.D. guddern, to gush out, to fall in abundance. Dat water guddert vam dake, the water pours from the roof. De appel guddert vam boom, the apples shower down from the tree. From some such form has arisen Lat. gutta, a drop.
Guttle.—Guzzle. To eat and drink with haste and greediness. From the sound of liquids passing down the throat. ON. gutla, to sound as liquids in a cask. Swiss gudeln, güdern, gutteln, gutzeln, to shake liquids in a flask, to dabble in liquids; gudlig, thick, muddy from shaking. Lat. glutglut, for the sound of liquid escaping from the mouth of a narrow-necked vessel; glutio, to swallow; Swiss gieseln, to gormandise. Fr. desgouziller, to gulp or swill up, to swallow down. Fr. godailler, It. gozzare, gozzavigliare, to make good cheer, to guzzle, guttle. It. gozzo, a throat.
Guttural. Lat. guttur, the throat. Probably from some such form as those mentioned in the last article.
Gymnastic. Gr. γυμνάζω, to train in muscular exercises, which were practised naked. Γυμνός, naked.
Gyves. W. gefyn, fetters. Bret. kef, trunk of a tree, stock or stump, log of fire-wood, fetter, manacle. It is the same word with Lat. cippus, a stake, Fr. cep, the stock of a tree, a log, or clog of wood, such a one as is hung about the neck of a ranging cur; [hence] ceps, a pair of stocks for malefactors, also (less properly) shackles, bolts, fetters, &c. It. ceppo in all the same senses.

Haberdasher. Haberdashers were of two kinds, haberdashers of small wares, sellers of needles, tapes, buttons, &c., and haberdashers of hats. The first of these would be well explained from ON. hapur-task, trumpery, things of trifling value, scruta frivola, ripsraps.—Gudm. A poor petty haberdasher (of small wares), mer-cerot.—Sherwood.

The haberdasher of hats seems named from some kind of stuff called hapertas, of which probably hats were made. ' La charge de hapertas, xiid.'—Liber Albus, 225. ' Les feez de leyne d'Espagne, wad-mal, mercerie, canevas,—feutre, lormerie, peil, haberdashrie, esquireux, et les autres choses ge l'em acustument par fee, vid.'—Ibid. 231.

Haberdine. Poor-john. A kind of cod-fish cured. Du. abberdaan, Fr. habor-dean, from the last of which, docked of the first syllable, seems to be formed E. poor-john, a kind of cheap salt-fish.

Habit.—Habitable. Lat. habitus, from habeo, to have ; a freq. from which is habitare, to dwell in, inhabit.

Habnab. Hit or miss, from AS. hab-ban, to have, and nabban (ne habban), not to have. It. Fatto o guasto, hab or nab, done or undone, made or marred.—Fl.

I put it Ev'n to your worship's bitterment, habnab ; I shall have a chance of the dice for it. B. Johnson, Tale of a Tub, iv. I.

Hack. A cratch for hay. See Hatch.

Hack.—Hackney. Sp. haca, OFr. haque, haquet, a pony ; Sp. hacanea, a nag, small horse somewhat bigger than a pony. It. achinea, Fr. haquenée, an am-bling horse.

The primary meaning seems a small horse as distinguished from the powerful animal required for warlike service ; then as only inferior horses would be let for hire it was specially applied to horses used for that purpose.

And loved well to have hors of price. He wend to have reproved be Of theft or murder if that he Had in his stable an hackney.—R. R.

It has much the appearance of being de-rived from E. nag.

To Hack.—Hash.—Hatch. The syl-lable hack, in which the voice is sharply checked, is used in all the Gothic dialects to signify a stroke with a sharp instru-ment or an effort abruptly checked. Sw. hacka, to chop, hack, hoe, to peck, pick, chatter with the teeth, stammer, stutter, cough constantly but slightly (Rietz), as we speak of a hacking cough ; hakkla, to stammer, to cough.

The Fr. hacher, to mince, produces E. hash (a word of modern introduction), properly to mince, then to dress meat a second time, because meat so dressed is commonly cut into small pieces. Hachis, a hackey or hachee, a sliced gallimawfrey or minced meat.—Cot.

Another application of Fr. hacher is to the hatchings of the hilt of a sword by which it is made rough for the hand. To hatch, to make cross cuts in an engraving. N. hak, a score or incision.

The hatching of eggs is the chipping or breaking open of the egg-shell by the pecking of the bird. G. hacken, to peck, hecken, to peck, to hatch young. In the same way Pol. kluć, to peck, to chip the egg as young birds do when hatched. Wykluć, to peck out, as the eyes ; wykluć sie, to creep from the egg, to be hatched.

Hackbut. See Arquebuss.

Hacqueton. See Gambison.

Haft. AS. hæft, a handle, holding, captive ; hæftas, bonds ; hæfting, a hold-ing ; hæftene, captivity. ON. hefta, to fetter ; heftr, fettered, hindered. Dan. hæfte to bind, fasten, to arrest. G. haft, fastening, clasp ; hold or firmness, at-tachment, imprisonment ; in haft sitzen, to be in durance ; haften, to hold fast, stick. Du. hecht, heft, handle ; hechten, heften, to fix, fasten, bind ; hecht, hecht, heft, handle ; hecht, fast, firm, tight.

From the notion of having or holding, as G. handhabe, a handle, from haben, to have.

Hag. AS. hæges, hægtesse, ODu. hage-tisse, MHG. hacke, häckel, hecse, Swiss hagsche, a witch ; häggele, the night hag, a female demon that walks on certain nights, a witch. Hagged is emaciated, scraggy like a witch, with sunken eyes.

A hagged carion of a wolf and a jolly sort of dog with good flesh upon 's back fell into company.—L'Estrange.

Im abgemagerten angesichte, im entzündeten auge der greisin die brandmale des hexenthums zu erkennen.—Sanders.

Hagard. Fr. hagard, hagard, wild, strange, froward, unsociable. Faucon hagard, a wild hawk, one that preyed for herself before she was caught. The word seems synonymous with It. ramingo, Fr. ramage, E. brancher, signifying a hawk which has lived among the branches, and is therefore not tamable like one that is taken from the nest. Fr. ramage, of or belonging to branches, also ramage, hagard, wild, rude. Espervier ramage, a brancher, ramage hawk.—Cot. From G. hag, a wood, forest, thicket, grove.— Küttner.

Haggis. A sheep's maw filled with minced meat. Fr. hachis, a hash. Norman Patois, haguer, E. dial. hag, to chop or hack; hag-clog, a chopping-block.

To Haggle, E. dial. hag, to hew, chop or hack, to haggle or dispute ; to haggle, to chop unhandsomely.—Hal. To keep agging at one is to tease or provoke him; not to be confounded with egging one on. The radical meaning of the word is to keep pecking at one, as Fr. picoter, or E. bicker. Ils sont toujours à picoter, they are ever pecking at one another, bickering.—Tarver. Sw. dial. hagga, to hew, hakka, to hack, to peck, to scold, keep finding fault with, tease. Pl.D. hickhacken, to wrangle.—Danneil. Swiss häggeln, to wrangle. Fris. hagghen, rixari.—Kil. Du. hakkelen, to stammer, stutter, haggle. The same metaphor is seen in Fr. chapoter, to hack or whittle, also to haggle, palter, dodge about the price of.—Cot.

Hail, AS. hagol, hægle, G. hagel, N. hagl, hail; hagla, to hail, to fall in drops, trickle; higla, to fall in fine drops; higl, drizzling rain or snow. NE. haggle, to hail; Sc. hagger, to rain gently. From the pattering sound of hail or rain. Sw. hacka, to chatter with the teeth; E. dial. hacker or hagger, to tremble with cold.— Hal.

To Hail. 1. To wish one health. Goth. Hails! AS. Hal was thu! Hail! equivalent to Lat. salve! be of good health. See Hale.

2. To hail a ship is from a different source, and the word should here be written hale, Pl.D. anhalen, to call to one, to address one passing by. Du. halen, haelen, to send for, call. See To Hale.

Hair. Du. haer, G. haar, hair.

Hake. A kind of cod. Doubtless from having a hook-shaped jaw. N. hakefisk, fish with hooked under-jaw, especially of salmon and trout; Swiss haggen, the male of the salmon; AS. hacod, a pike, a fish with projecting under-jaw.

Halberd. A long-handled axe, from Swiss halm, the helve or handle of an axe, and OHG. parten, G. barte, a broad axe. Helm-ackes, bipennis.—Gl. 12th century in Schm. Now has Arthure his axe and the halme grypes. Sir Gawayne and the Gr. Kn. The word was however early misunderstood as if it signified an axe for crashing a helmet. Helm-parten, cassidolabrum.—Gl. 15th century in Schm. The origin of the latter half of the word seems from Bohem. brada, a beard, chin, whence bradaty, having a large beard or chin; bradatice, a wide-bearded or broad axe. Gr. γένυς, the under-jaw, is used for the edge of an axe. Comp. also Lap. skaut, the point of an axe, skautja, beard.

To Hale.—Haul. To pull or drag.—B. G. holen, to fetch, drag, tow. Athem holen, to draw breath. Du. haelen, to call, send for, fetch, draw. Fr. haler, to hale, haul, tow. It will doubtless seem a far-fetched origin to derive the expression from the notion of setting on a dog, but it is one that is supported by many analogies. The most obvious mode of driving an animal is by setting a dog at it, and from driving an animal to the impulsion of an inanimate object is an easy step. Pl.D. hissen, to set on a dog; de schaop hissen, to drive sheep; Bret. hissa, issa, to incite, to push on, to draw up the sail.—Dict. Langued. in v. isso. From Fr. hare! cry to encourage or set on a dog, are formed harer, to incite, set on, attack, harier, to harass, urge, molest, provoke, and thence OE. harr, or harry, properly to drive as a beast by means of a dog, then to drag by force. ' He haryeth hym about as if he were a traytour. I harye, or mysseentreat or hale one, Je harie. I harry, or carry by force, je traine and je hercelle.'—Palsgr. in Way. ' The corps of the sayde byshope with his two servauntes were haryed to Thamys side.'—Fabian, ibid. And develles salle harre hym up evene In the ayre als he suld stegh to hevene. Hampole, Ibid. Then with a derivative el, Fr. harele, outcry; haraler, to tease, to vex; harele, a flock or herd (from the notion of driving, as Gr. ἀγέλη, a herd, from ἄγω, to drive); hasler (for harier), haller, haler, to halloo or hound on dogs—Cot. ; OE. harl, to harass, drive, cast. King Richard this noble knight Acres nom so, And harlede so the Sarrazins in eche side about.

That the ssrewe ne dorste in none ende at route. R. G. 487.
Sc. harle, to pull or drag.
About the wallis of Troy he saw quhat wyse Achilles harlit Hectoris body thrys.—D. V.
To haurl, to drag or pull.—Hal.
On the same principle It. tirare, to draw, hale, allure unto—Fl., may be connected with the tarring, tirring, or setting on of dogs.

Hale. Sound, in good health. Goth. hails, sound, healthy; gahails, entire; AS. hal, healthy, sound, whole, safe; halgedon, to heal; Du. heel, whole, entire, unbroken, sound, healthy; heylen, heelen, to heal. ON. heill, whole, sound, prosperous. Gr. ὅλος, entire, whole, sound; ὑγιὴς καὶ ὅλος, safe and sound; w. holl, all; hollol, whole. The root appears in Lat. with an initial s instead of the aspirate. Salvus, unbroken, uninjured, sound, in good health; salve! hail! salus, health; solidus, sound, entire, whole; solus (undivided), alone. Sanscr. sarva, all. Manx slane, whole, total, hale; slaney, whole, healed; slaynt, health. The radical identity of hale and whole is shown in wholesome, healthy.

Half. Goth. halbs, half; ON. halfa, alfa, region, part, side. Swiss halb, the side of a body; sunnet-halb, southwards; schatten-halb, northwards. It is probable that side is the original meaning of the word. OHG. in halbo, in latere (montis); halpun, latere (dominus erit in latere tuo); alahalba, on all sides.—Graff. Lap. pele, side, half. Mo pelen, at my side; niubben pelen, on the other side.

Halibut. A large kind of flat fish. Du. heil-bot, from heil, holy, and bot, botvisch, a flat fish. ON. heilag-fiski.

Halidom. ON. heilagr dómr, things of especial holiness, the relics of the saints, on which oaths were formerly taken.

Hall. AS. heal, Lat. aula, It. sala, Fr. salle. OHG. sal, house, residence; Bret. sal (as hall in E.), a gentleman's house in the country.

Halloo. Sp. jalear, to encourage hounds to follow the chase. Fr. halle! an interjection of cheering or setting on of a dog; haller, to hallow or encourage dogs.—Cot. The Pl.D. exclamation hallo! is used as a subst. in the sense of outcry; hallôn, to halloo.—Danneil.

To Hallow. AS. halgian, to keep holy, to consecrate. 'Mi cume thauh hit thunche attre, hit is thauh healu-winde.' Though my coming seems bitter, yet it is healing.—Ancren Riwle, 190. See Holy.

Hallucination. Lat. hallucināri, to be in error, to blunder.

Halm.—Haulm. The stalk of corn. G. halm, Gr. κάλαμος, Lat. calamus, culmus, Fr. chaulme, straw.

Halo. Lat. halo, Gr. ἅλως, the disk of the sun or moon.

Halse.—Hawse. OE. halse, G. Du. hals, the neck.
And if so be that thou find me false Another day, hang me up by the halse. Chaucer in R.

To Halse.—Three distinct words are here confounded.
1. To halse, or hawse, Du. halsen, helsen, omhelsen, to embrace, take one by the neck, from hals, the neck, as Fr. accoler, to coll or clip about the neck, from Fr. col, cou, neck. Halsyn, amplector.—Pr. Pm.
2. To halse, or hailse, ON. heilsa, Sw. halsa, Dan. hilse, to salute, to wish one health, from ON. heilsa, health.
And the eleven sterres halsed him all.—P. P.
3. To halse, or hawse, to raise, heave, or drag up, from It. alzare, Fr. haulser, hausser, to raise. 'Everything was hawsed above measure; amerciaments were turned into fines, fines into ransomes.'—Sir T. More in R. The word was especially used in nautical matters. It. alzare le vela, to hawse (now exchanged for hoist, a radically different word) sail. 'He wayed up his anchors and halsed up his sails.'—Grafton in R. The hawse-holes, the holes in the bow of a ship through which the cable runs in halsing or raising the anchor. Fr. haulseree, the drawing or haling of barges up a river by the force of men ashore.—Cot. Hence E. halse, to tow, halser, or hawser, a thick cord for towing vessels. It. alzana, a halse, a rope or cable for to halse, hale, or draw barges against the stream; also a crane to hoise up great weights; alzaniere, a halsier, or he that haleth a barge.—Fl.

Halt. 1. To stop. G., Sw. halt! hold! stop! Fr. faire halte, to stop, stay, make a stand.—Cot.
2. Goth. halts, ON. halltr, lame; halltra, N. haltra, halta, to halt, limp, or go lame; Wall. halcter, chaleter, to limp. ON. málhaltr (mál, speech), stammering. The notion of impeded speech or gait, as in stammering or limping, where instead of flowing in a uniform course the action seems to consist of a succession of jogs or uneven impulses, may be expressed by forms representing in the first place broken sounds, then abrupt movements or efforts. Thus we have Sc. hotter, to rattle as thunder; NE. hotter, to shake, jolt, move limpingly or lamely. 'Hottering on nae better an a lamiter.'—Atkinson. Sc. hatter, to rattle, batter, speak thick and confusedly.
Helmys of hard steill thai hatterit and heuch. Gaw. and Gol.
Hottle, anything unsteady, as a young child beginning to walk; to hatch, hotch, to move by jerks. Bav. hott! hott! re-presents the jog of a trotting horse. Swiss hottern, hotzeln, hotzern, to jolt, jog, shake, stumble; hotzen, to move up and down; hotz, hutz, a spring or start; Sc. hat, haut, to hop, to limp. Haut stap an loup, hop step and jump. The Sc. haut would correspond to an E. halt, and thus by the introduction of an l from the broad sound of the vowel, as in falter, palter, in jolt compared with jot, in G. holper, a jolt, compared with Bav. hoppern, to jog, in Pl.D. taltern compared with E. tatters, we arrive at N. haltra and E. halt, to limp.
Halter, ohg. halaftra, halftra, Du. halfter, halgtre, halchter, halster, halter, a halter; Bav. halfter, halster, a pair of braces; ON. hógld, a buckle, noose, han-dle; N. hogd, hovd, hovel, holdr, a noose, buckle. Conpeditus, gehalffter, cum quibus ligant pedes equorum.—Vocab. A.D. 1430, in Deutsch. Mund. iv.
Ham. I. The back part of the thighs, not of the knees, as often explained. The ham-strings are the strong sinews passing from the hams to the lower leg. Du. ham, hamme, poples. ON. hóm, the rump; ham-leðr, leather from the back of horses or oxen. 'Thvi setur thu hómina við honum.' Why do you turn your back to him? Hama (of horses), to turn their rumps to the weather. N. homa, to back, to move backwards, shift the rump to one side; Dan. humme, to back a carriage. Fin. humma! cry to make a horse back; hummastaa, to make a horse back or stop. According to Outzen the cry homme! or humme! is in general use over Friesland and Denmark, in order to keep a horse quiet when one approaches him or wants to do something to him. The essential meaning then is, still! be quiet! in ac-cordance with the G. use of the Pl.D. hum! humme! to stop a person from doing anything, or to make a horse back into the shafts of a carriage. G. hamm! cry of prohibition to children; hamm! hamm! let it alone. From the sense of stopping to that of backing or moving in the opposite direction is an easy step.
If the explanation of the cry offered under Hem be correct it will follow that the N. homa, Dan. humme, to back (and thence ON. hóm, E. ham, the rump or back parts of the thighs), are from the cry homme! hamm! back! and not vice versâ.
2. Bav. hammen, Du. hamme, E. ham, a salted thigh of pork, can hardly be dis-tinct from ham, the back part of the thigh. If there be a radical connection with Sp. jamon, Fr. jambon, ham. It. giambone, any great leg, thigh, gammon or pestle of a beast (Fl.), it must be be-cause It. gamba, Fr. jamba, a leg, are from the same source with E. ham.
To Hamble.—Hamel. OHG. hamal, mutilated, hamalon, to mutilate; beha-melt werdent, truncantur membris.—Graff. Probably the translation of AS. hamelan by to hamstring is a piece of false etymology, as that is certainly not the meaning of the hameling of dogs, and does not agree with the sense of the word in the cognate dialects. G. hammel, a castrated sheep; Bav. hammel, a wether, also a sheep without horns; hummel-bock, a goat without horns; NE. hum-meld, without horns; to hummel, humble, to break off the beards of barley; Sw. dial. hammla, to lop or pollard trees. Perhaps the course of derivation may run from Du. hompelen, to stumble, to limp; Sw. dial. hambloter, hamloter (of an old man), stumbling, tottering; E. dial. hamel, to limp, to walk lame, and thence in a factitive sense to cause to go lame, to disable from going, to restrain, to disable in any way, to mutilate. ON. hamla, to hin-der one from doing anything, to disable him; hamla einn at höndum ok fótum, to cut off his hands and feet; hamlaðr, dis-abled by wounds or bonds from appear-ing to prosecute his right; hamla, höm-luband, the withy that binds the oar to the pin; Du. hamme, kuhamme, a shackle for a cow.—Kil. See To Hamper.
Hames.—Haums.—Heams. The two crooked pieces of wood which en-compass a horse-collar and to which the traces are fastened. The stuffing of hay or straw by which these were prevented from galling the shoulders of the horse was called hamberwe, or hanaborough, a coarse horse-collar, made of reed or straw—Hal., from berwe, or borough, shelter, protection against the hames. The same elements in the opposite order may be recognised in E. dial. baurghwan, brau-chin (a collar for a horse made of old stockings stuffed with straw,—Grose), and Sc. brechame. ' The straw brechame is now supplanted by the leather collar.'—Jam.
The origin of the word hame is seen in the Wall. Hène, a splint or thin piece of wood, corresponding to G. schiene, a splint, band to keep things close (arm-schiene, bein-schiene, armour for the arm or leg). The old writing of the Walloon word was xhène, and the change from the hissing sound of sch to that of the simple aspirate is in accordance with the usual course of the dialect. Hène di gorai, attelle de collier de cheval.—Grandgr. It will be observed that the Fr. attelles (the haumes of a draught-horse's collar—Cot.) also signifies a splint. OFr. eschames, chames, laths, shingles.—Roquef.
Flem. haem, a horse-collar. The word is sometimes used in the singular in that sense in E. 'The deponent remembers to have seen her father carry a horse and hem to Muirtown.'—Jam. A.D. 1806.

Hamlet. AS. ham, a village, town, farm, property, dwelling; Goth. haims, Fr. hameau, a village.
Probably the fundamental meaning is simply a portion, in accordance with the radical sense of the word ham (pars abscissa cujusque rei, frustum—Wachter.); hamme, hompe, a piece or lump of something eatable; boterham, a piece of bread and butter; ham, hamme, a piece of pasture; wilgbeham, an osier-bed. Dorsetsh. ham, an inclosed mead.—Barnes. In the same way certain open pieces of pasture at Cambridge were called Christ's Pieces, Parker's Pieces. In Friesland the term ham is used to designate a piece of marshland, or the piece of land in which a village is situated.—Brem. Wtb. Hence the name would naturally be transferred to the village itself. Swiss hain, heim, the inclosed plot of land in which a house is placed, house, dwelling-place. In the same way we have G. fleck, a flap, piece, patch, a small piece of land, a spot, place, while flecken is the common name for a village or small town.
To Hammel. See Hamble.
Hammer. GD. hammer, ON. hamar. A representation of the sound of blows.
Hammock. An American word designating the long suspended nets in which the natives slept. 'A great many Indians in canoes came to the ship today for the purpose of bartering their cotton and hamacas or nets in which they sleep.'—Columbus' 1st Voyage in Web-ster. In Du. transformed by a false etymology to hangmak, hangmat.
Hamper. Mid.Lat. hanaperium. Properly a receptacle for cups. Fr. hanap, a drinking vessel; G. napf, a porringer, bowl, platter.
To Hamper. — Hobble. — Hopple.
The idea of inefficient impeded action is commonly expressed by the figure of imperfect or impeded speech, an image immediately admitting of oral representation. The signification is then carried on to the cause or instrument of impediment, to the act of hindrance, bringing to a stand, confinement. Swiss staggeln, to stammer, is identical with E. stagger, to walk unsteadily, and figuratively we speak of being staggered by a statement, being brought to a stand by it, stopped in the course we were proceeding. On the same principle Du. haperen, to stammer, hesitate, falter, stick fast; haperwerk, bungling, bad work; hapering, stammering, boggling, hindrance, obstacle.—Halma. The nasal pronunciation gives Sc. hamp, to stammer, also to halt in walking, to read with difficulty, and E. hamper (in a factitive sense), to cause to stick, to impede, entangle.
Again we have Sc. habble, habber, to stutter, to speak or act confusedly, to habble a lesson, to say it imperfectly; Du. hobbelen, to jolt, to rock, to stammer, and (with the nasal) hompelen, as E. hobble, to totter, to limp or walk lame; Sc. hobble, to cobble shoes, to mend them in a bungling manner; Pl.D. humpeln, to limp, to bungle. Sw. happla, to stammer, hesitate, stop short; E. hopple, to move weakly and unsteadily.—Hal. Then in a factitive sense to hobble or hopple a horse, to hamper its movements by tying its legs together.
Hand. Common to all the languages of the Gothic stock, and probably named as the instrument of seizing. ON. henda, Lat. prehendere, to seize.
Handsome. — Handy. What falls readily to hand. G. handsam, convenient; Du. handsaem, dextrous, convenient, mild, tractable; OE. hende, courteous; N. hendt, adapted; hendug, Dan. haendig, behandig, handy, dextrous.
To Hang. ON. hanga, pret. héck; AS. hon, pret. hoh, to hang. In the same way OS. fanga and fá, pret. féck, AS. fon, pret. foh, to fang or get hold of; ON. ganga, pret. géck, AS. gan, to go or gang. The primitive meaning seems, to fasten on a hook, ON. hack.
Hank. Hank, a rope or latch for fastening a gate, a handle. To have a hank on another, to have him entangled. To keep a good hank upon your horse, to have a good hold upon the reins.—Hal. Hank, an inclination or propensity of mind.
The fundamental sense of hank is to cause to hang, to fasten. 'He hanked not the picture of his body upon the cross.'—Hooper in R. G. henken, hängen, to hang or fasten something upon another ; gehenk, henkel, what serves to hang something, a belt, girdle, the ear of a pot ; Pl.D. henk, a handle ; N. haank, a bunch, cluster of things hanging together. Hank in the sense of a settled tendency or propensity of mind may be explained by the G. expression, sein herz an etwas hangen, to set his heart upon a thing, to fix his affections upon it. ON. haunk, E. hank, a wreath of thread wound round a reel, is from the notion of fastening, in the same way that the synonymous hasp is from the same radical notion.

To Hanker. To be very desirous of something.—B. Du. hungkeren, to seek eagerly, applied in the first instance to children seeking the breast.—Kil. From the whinnying cry by which they make known their want. Flem. hungkeren, hinnire ; E. hummer, to whinny, as when the horse hears the corn shaken in the sieve. The same figure is used in Du. janken, to yelp as a dog for a piece of meat ; hy jankt om dat ampt, he hankers (aspire avidement) after that office.—Halma.

Hansel.—Hanse-Town. Hansel, or more fully good-hansel, is an earnest, something given or done to make good a contract.
Sendeth ows to gode hans An c. thousand besans.—Alisaunder, 2930.
In the way of good-hansel, de bon erre.—Palsgr. Then applied to the first use of a thing, as that which confirms the possession.
The formation of the word (hand, and AS. syllan, sellan, ON. sella, to give, bestow, deliver) has been commonly misunderstood as if it signified delivery of possession, giving a thing into the hand of another. The real import is a striking of hands, a giving of the hand in token of conclusion, making the expression synonymous with handfast. AS. handfastan, to pledge one's hand ; Sc. handfast, to betroth by joining hands.—Jamieson. ON. Handsal, stipulatio manu facta, an agreement upon which hands have been joined, a settled contract ; handsala, fidem dextra stipulari, to join hands on it. From handsal, a contract, were named the Hansals-städtr, the Hanse Towns, a confederation of towns on the Baltic and North Sea united by mutual agreement for the security of trade. From this original the term hanse was applied in a more general sense to a mercantile corporation. Fr. Hanse, a company, society, or corporation of merchants (for so it signifies in the book of the ordonnances of Paris) ; also an association with, or the freedom of, the Hanse, also the fee or fine which is paid for that freedom ; hanser, to make free of a civil company or corporation. G. hänseln, to hansel, to initiate a novice.—Küttner. Here it will be observed we apparently get back to the original form of the word, although the second syllable of the G. verb is the usual frequentative termination, and not the element sell, signifying to deliver, in the original expression.

* Hantle. A considerable number.—Jam. From handful, as Northampton spunful or spuntle, a spoonful.—Mrs Baker. Staff. boutle, a boukful or pailful. Hesse hampel, a handful.

Hap.—Happy.—Happen. Hap, luck, is what we catch, what falls to our lot. Happy, fortunate, having good hap. To happen, to befall. So NFris. hinnen, to seize with the hand, and reflectively to happen ; ON. henda, to seize, also to happen. Fr. happer, to hap or catch, to snatch or grasp at.—Cot. Du. habben en snabben, captare ; happen, to snap like a dog, seize, catch, take.—Kil. Pl.D. Happ, Happs, imitation of the sound made by the jaws ; happ'n, to take with the mouth so as to let the sound happ be heard ; happig, eager, greedy.—Danneil.

To Hap. To wrap up. Probably a corruption, of whap, from wlap. Lappyn', or whappyn' in clothes—involvo.—Pr. Pm. See Lap.

Harangue. The old derivation from the ring or audience addressed in a solemn discourse is probably correct. Consedere duces, et vulgi stante corona—. The MHG. ring was applied to the lists or inclosure for a combat, or to the space cleared for a combat, just as with us the ring is the technical term for the inclosure in a fight with fists. The term was also applied to the audience in a court of justice, to the circle of witnesses in a solemn betrothal.—Zarncke, ii. 707. From the first of these senses must be explained. It. aringo, arringo, a list or tilt yard; from the second, arringare, to arrange or set in array [properly to make a ring, to place the audience for hearing], also to make an oration or set speech in public, to address a ring, [and thence] aringa, arenga, arringa, a public set speech or declaration, an harangue; arringo, arringhiera, a pulpit or chair wherein orations are made, a balcony.—Fl. The derivation from ring explains the double sense of It. aringo, which would remain unaccounted for if arringare, to harangue, were identical with E. arraign, OFr. aregnier, araisner. Mid. Lat. adrationare. The syllable ha in Fr. harangue represents the h in OHG. hring, as the ha in hanap, the h in OHG. hnapf; or the ca in canif, the k in knife.
Harass. Fr. harasser, to tire or toil out, to vex, disquiet, harry, hurry, turmoil.—Cot. From the figure of setting on a dog to attack another animal. Fr. harer un chien, to set a dog on a beast; harier, to harry, hurry, vex, molest.—Cot. The angry snarling of a dog is represented by the sound of the letters rr, ss, st, ts, tr, and as the sounds of the angry animal are imitated in order to excite his anger and set him on an opponent, a variety of words are formed from the foregoing radical letters with the sense of setting on, inciting, provoking, irritating, teasing, annoying. We may cite Lat. hirrire, to snarl; W. hyr, the gnar or snarl of a dog, a word used by one who puts a dog forward to fight, a pushing or egging on; hys, a snarl; hysian, hysio, to cause to snarl, to urge, to set on; hys! used in setting on a dog. Walach. hirii, to snarl, to set on, incite, irritate, se hirii, to quarrel. E. dial, to harr, to snarl; to hare, to hurry, harass, scare.—Hal. N. hirra, hissa, to set on a dog. Dan. irre, to tease, opirre, to irritate, provoke. In the same way E. to tar or ter, to set on a dog, to provoke; Dan. tirre, to tease, to worry.
Harbinger. One sent on to prepare harbourage or lodgment for his employer, thence one who announces the arrival of another. AS. heribyrigan, OE. harborow, Sc. herbery, herbry, to harbour or give lodgment or quarters to. Hence herbryage, harbourage, lodging, from which would be formed harb'rager, harbrenger, as from message, messenger, from scavage, scavenger. Barbour uses herbryour in the same signification direct from herbry.

Harbour. In the Frankish kingdoms of the middle ages, when the whole scheme of government was military, the army was taken as the type of the public service in general, and so heri (G. heer, army) in composition must be understood in a more general sense than its etymology would import. Thus heribannum, properly the duty of military service, or a money composition for non-performance, was applied to any exaction for the public service; heribergum (G. bergen, AS. beorgan, to shelter) was the duty of lodging the officers of the crown on public service, or a contribution for that purpose. 'Ut nec pro waitâ, &c., nec pro heribergare nec pro alio banno heribannum comes exactare præsumat, nisi, &c.'—Leg. Car. Mag. in Muratori, Diss. 19, p. 53. In later times the word was applied to shelter, lodgment, hospitality in general, as in G. herberge. It. albergo, Fr. auberge, an inn, or house for the harbouring of travellers; OE. harborough, to harbour, or give shelter to.
I was herbarweles and ye herboriden me. Wicliff in R.
Then went forth our pinnaces to seek harborough, and found many good harbours, of the which we entered into one with our shippes.—Hackluyt in R.
Bret. herberc'hia, to give shelter, lodging, hospitality.
Hard. Close, compacted, difficult.—B. G. hart, N. hardr, Goth. hardus. Gr. κάρτος, κράτος, strength.
Hardy. Fr. hardi, Bret. her, hardiz, It. ardito, daring; ardire, to dare. Fr. harier, hardier, OE. hardy, hardish, to excite, set on, encourage. From the figure of setting on a dog, Fr. harer un chien. W. hyrrio, hyrddio, to set on, irritate, push, thrust, drive, make an onset; hwrdd, an assault, onset; 'Rouchi hourder les chiens, to set them on.' 'Hyrte hine hord-weard,' the treasure-keeper animated himself.—Beowulf 5183. See Harass.
Hare. G. hase.
To Hare. To scare or terrify. 'To hare and rate them at every turn is not to teach them, but to vex and torment them to no purpose.'—Locke on Education. Fr. harer un chien, to set on a dog. See Harass.
Haricot. A dish described by Cot. as made of small pieces of mutton a little boiled, then fried. Hotchepot of many meates, haricot.—Palsg. The meaning of the word seems to be, hacked or chopped, cut up into small bits, the name of haricot being also given to a kind of beans the pods of which are sliced for dressing, in Du. snijboonen, from snijden, to cut. Wall. halcoter, to joggle, to haggle ; dial. of Bayonne haricoter, to haggle (Grand-gagnage), Rouchi haricotier, a huckster. Harigoter, to jog ; hargoter, to haggle, wrangle.—Roquef. The word seems formed from hack or hag; hacoter, halcoter, harcoter.

Hark.—Hearken.—Hist. To hark, to whisper.—Jam. ON. hark, Bohem. hrk, noise, hrčeti, to murmur, rustle. The effort of listening is directed to catch low sounds ; accordingly we intimate our wish that a person should listen by a representation of the low sound to which his attention is to be directed. Thus the Latins represented the low rustling sound made by a person moving by the letters st! which were also taken as a command to listen or to keep still. The corresponding E. term is hist! which may be rendered either hark! or be silent! Hist! hold awhile [hem! st! mane], I hear the creaking of Glycerium's door, Colman's Terence in R. W. hust, a low or buzzing noise ; husting, a whisper. In the same way hark! is originally the representation of a rustling sound, then an intimation to listen. G. horchen, to listen.

Harlot. Not originally appropriated to a female, nor even to a person of bad character. He was a gentil harlot and a kind, A better felaw sholde a man not find. Chaucer. Prol. A sturdy harlot went hem ay behind That was hir hostes man, and bare a sack, And what men yave him, laid it on his back. Sompnours Tale. It seems to have simply signified a young man, from W. herlawd, herlod, a youth, a stripling, herlodes, a damsel ; then to have acquired the sense of a loose companion. 'These harlottes that haunt bordels of these foule women.'—Parson's Tale. Harlotry, scurrilitas.—Wiclif. Ephes. c. v. A similar development of meaning is seen in Fr. hardel, hardeau, a youth, a ribald, vaurien, mauvais sujet.—Roquef. Hardelle, a young girl. The Lat. adulter would seem originally to have signified no more than a young man. Gerro, a tryfelour or a harlott.—Medulla. An harlott, balator, rusticus, mima, joculator, nugator, scurrulus. To do harlotry, scurrari.—Cath. Ang. in Pr. Par.

Harm. AS. hearm, evil, harm ; ON. harmr, grief, sorrow, injury ; harma, to grieve ; Sw. harm, anger, vexation ; harmlig, provoking. G. harm, affliction, trouble ; gram, grief, sorrow, vexation ; grämlich, peevish, morose.

Harmony. Gr. ἁρμονία, from ἁρμός, a suiting or fitting together.

Harness, G. harnisch, armour. Fr. harnois. It. arnese, all manner of harness, equipage, munition, furniture, or tackling, for sea or land ; wearing clothes, also an engine or device.—Fl. Harnois de gueule, belly-furniture, meat and drink.—Cot. The meaning of the word is thus habiliment, furniture, probably from Sp. guarnear, guarnescer, to garnish, trim, adorn, to harness mules ; guarnés, parts of a tackle-fall ; guarnicion, garniture, trimming, (in pl.) armour of defence ; harness of horses. Ptg. guarnecer, to provide, furnish, equip.

Harp. G. harfe, Fr. harpe. The instrument was probably named from the way of sounding it by plucking the strings with a hook or with the fingers. See Harpoon.

To Harp or Hark back.
To return to an old subject. The waggoners' cry to make horses back is in Devonshire haap! or haap back! To ha-ape, to stop or keep back.—Hal. The cry in Da. dial. is hop dig! At hoppe en vogn, to back a waggon. In Holstein hoppen or huppen, to rügge huppen. In Westerwald the cry is hüf! and thence hüfe, to turn back ; gehüf, going backwards. When to haap back was used in a metaphorical sense among people who were ignorant of the waggoners' cry, a meaning was given to it as if it was a metaphor from harping on an old string, or listening to the hounds that have struck the scent behind us. 'What is the use of tormenting yourself by constantly harping back to old days?'—Dumbleton Common, 1867; I. p. 156.

Harpoon. Fr. harpon, a barbed iron for spearing fish, also a cramp-iron ; harpin, a boat-hook. From harper, to seize, to gripe ; se harper l'un à l'autre, to grapple ; harpi, greedy, snatching or grasping at ; harpe, claws, talons ; Lang. arpo, a claw ; arpi, to clutch or scratch. Gr. ἁρπάζω, Lat. rapio, to seize, snatch, carry away.

Harpy. Gr. Ἅρπυια, Lat. Harpya, a fabled ravening fowl with a woman's face.

Harridan. This word is one of those that are to be explained by the Walloon corruption of an initial sch to h, several examples of which are given under Hoaming. On this principle the Du.

schaerde, scheure, a breach or nick, becomes Wall. hard (d silent—Grandg.), har, haur, breach, nick, gap.—Remacle. Hence hardi, haurdé, gap-toothed. Veie hardaie, vieille bréchedent, old gap-toothed woman ; hârdé-dain, bréchedent, corresponding exactly to Du. schaerdtan-dig, serræ modo dentatus. The simple union of the elements har, breach, and dain, tooth, would construct still more exactly the E. harridan. In the same way Westerwald raff, reff, a heckle or iron comb for plucking off the heads of flax, is in Swabia applied to a broken row of teeth. Westerw. zahnrähj, a gap in the teeth; Swab, raffel, zahnraffel, a broken-toothed person, abusive term for an old woman.—Schmid.

Harrow! A cry of distress, OFr. hare ! harau ! Crier haro sur, to make hue and cry after. Marauder, haroder, to cry harrow ! to cry out upon, exclaim against, revile. Bret, harao ! cry when one is hooted. Bohem. hr ! hrr ! interjection of excitement (frementis), hurrah! OHG. haren, to cry out. Sc. harro ! an outcry for help, also often used as a cheer or encouragement to pursuit. A harrowing sight is one which leads to the exclamation harrow !

Harrow. Harowe, erpica, et traha, Anglice a slede.—Pr. Pm. Dan. harv, a harrow. Sw. dial, harv, a hay-rake. Fin. hara, a brush-harrow made of the branches of pine-trees ; hargala, to harrow ; harawa, a hay-rake ; Esthon. harrima, harjama, to brush, to comb ; harjas, a brush ; karri, a brush, heckle, comb. G. harke, a rake, Fr. herce, a harrow, are probably other modifications of the same radical form.

To Harry.—Herry. To daunt, to fright, to scold at, handle roughly.—B. Sc. herry, hirry, harry, to rob, spoil, pillage, ruin by extortion. AS. hergian, her-ian, to plunder, afflict, vex. Fr. harrier, hardier, to molest, provoke, vex, toil, turmoil. ON. heria, to make an inroad on. N. heria, to plague, oppress, ruin. Dan. hærge, hærje, to ravage. The origin seems shown in Fr. harer, to set on a dog to attack. See Harass. The word was also written harow. The harrowing of hell was the triumphant expedition of Christ after his crucifixion, when he brought away the souls of the righteous, who had died and had been held captive in hell since the beginning of the world.

Harsh. G. harsch, hard, rough, austere ; Dan. harsk, rancid ; Sc. harsk. hars, harsh, rough, pointed, bitter ; OE. harske, or haske, as sundry frutys, stypticus.—Pr. Pm. Harsh or astringent in taste is what makes the throat rough and the voice hoarse, and it will be observed that hoarse is written with and without the r (hoos, hoarse, raucus—Pr. Pm.), in the same way that we have hask and harsk. ' He hath a great haskness, gravi asthmate implicatur,'—Horman in Way. ' Dates are good for the harrishness, or roughness of the throte.'—Turner's Herbal, ibid. ' Sorbum, an harryshe pear.'—Elyot, ibid.

* Hart. AS. heart, heorut, ON. hjörtr, OHG. hiruz, G. hirsch, a stag. As Lat. cervus shows a connection with Gr. κέρας, Lat. cornu, a horn, the word is supposed to mean the horned one, the n of horn, as the nu of cornu, not being radical. So from Magy. szarv, a horn, szarvas, horned, a stag.

Harvest. G. herbst, harvest, autumn ; ON. haust, autumn, hausta, to harvest ; Bret. Eost, August, harvest ; eosta, to harvest. The Du. has oogst, harvest ; oogsten, to harvest, whence Ihre conjectures that all these forms, oogst, aust, haust, are from Lat. Augustus, and G. herbst, E. harvest, are a further corruption by the creeping in of an r.

To Hase. To urge, drive, harass, especially with labour.—Webster. Others explain it, to amaze, to scare. To fright with a sudden noise.—B. Perhaps from taking away the breath. To hase, to breathe short.—Hal. N. hæsa, to pant with fatigue and exhaustion. But the more probable origin is perhaps the notion of urging, driving, from the cry (Finnish) has! has! used in setting on a dog ; hasittaa, to set on, incite, Fr. haser, to irritate, vex, stimulate.—Roquef. 'Le suppliant dit a icellui Bordier, Tu as affolé mon fils ; lequel luy repondi que si le haseroit (if he provoked him) que si feroit a lui mesme.'—Record, a.d. 1450, in Duc. Henschel. Lap. hasketet, to set on dogs ; Sw. haska på någon, to hurry one on, urge one on ; haska bort, to drive away.

Hasel. N. hasl, Du. haze-noot, hazel-noot, the common nut. From the conspicuous husk or beard in which it is enveloped. Dan. hase, the beard of nuts. Da. dial. haas, haser, the beard of corn ; fnas, Sw. fnas, the beard of nuts. Bav. hosen, fesen, the husk of corn. E. hose was formerly used in the same sense. Follicoli, the hull, hose, peel or thin skin that encloseth any wheat or rye when it is green.—Fl.
Hash. Cooked meat cut into small pieces for the purpose of being dressed a second time. Fr. hachis, a hachey or hachee, a sliced gallimawfrey or minced meat.—Cot. From hacher, to hack or mince.

Haslet.—Hastener. A hog's haslet, or harslet, the liver, heart, and lights of a pig. Corrupted from hastelets. Fr. has-tille, hasterel, hastemenue, the pluck or gather of an animal. The sense is little roastings, from Fr. haste, a spit, also a piece of roast meat. Hastelle, hastellet, hastille, a skewer, splinter, whence E. hastier, or corruptly hastener, a skreen to reverberate the fire on roasting meat. Hastlere, that rostythe mete, assator, as-sarius.—Pr. Pm. OFr. hastier, the rack on which the spit turns; to haste, to roast.—Hal.
First to you I will schawe, The poyntes of cure all by rawe ; Of potage, hastery and bakun mete. Liber Cure Cocorum in Way.
All from Lat. hasta, a spear, transferred to the signification of a spit. It is singu-lar that the Du. should have arrived by a totally different track at so similar a form as harst, a roast, herdsten, harsten, to roast, apparently from heerde, hearth.—Kil. AS. hyrstan, to fry.

Hasp.—Hapse. AS. hæps, a lock, latch, or bolt of a door ; G. haspe, hdspe, the hinge of a door, catch into which the latch falls ; ON. hespa, a clasp, buckle, also a hasp or hank of thread ; thread wound round a wheel so as to make a closed link. Sw. haspa, a latch, Du. haspe, haspel. It. aspo, aspolo, E. hasp, a reel to wind yarn on.—B.
From the snapping sound made by a clasp in closing. For the same reason a clasp is also called a snap, and clapps ! (whence clapse, clasp) is an imitation of the same sound. Pl.D. happen, happsen, to snap with the jaws so as to let the sound happ, or happs, be heard.—Dan-neil. Fr. happe, a clasp ; happer, to snap or snatch.
On the same principle Du. gaspe, ghespe, a clasp, may be compared with E. gasp, to snap after breath.

Hassock. A tuft of sedge or rushes, a mat ; hassock-head, a matted head, bushy entangled head of hair.—Hal. Sc. has-sock, a besom, anything bushy, a large round turf of peat used as a seat.—Jam. Fin. hassa, a shaggy entangled condition ; hassapää (pää, head), tangled hair ; karwa-hassa (karwa, hair), having shaggy hair as a dog or bear. See Housings.

Haste.—Hate. These words proba-bly both have their origin in the cry has! has! (Fin.), used in setting on a dog to attack or pursue, an act which in one point of view affords the image of urging or hurrying on, and in another of hostility, contest, and hate. See Heat. Fin. has-ittaa, Esthon. assitama, Lap. hasetet, hasketet, to set on dogs ; Sw. haska or hasta på någon, to hurry one on, to urge one on ; haska efter odjur, to pursue wild beasts ; haska ut, to drive out ; ON. hasta á, to threaten, scold ; hasta, to haste ; hastr, höstugr, severe. OHG. hazon, to hate, to pursue ; hazjan, G. hetzen, to set on, to incite ; Swiss hatz, anger, rancour, hatred (Stalder), in Austria, wrangling, quarrel ; E. hasty, easily roused to anger, excitable ; Mid.Lat. asto animo, with hos-tile intention ; adastiare, to provoke to war ; It. aschio, rancour, malice ; aschi-are, to bear malice. Fr. haster, hater, aastir, ahastir, aatir, to irritate, provoke, excite ; haster, hater, to hasten. Hesser, to incite, animate, also to hate.—Roquef. 'Aucuns desdits de Mons aastirent de paroles ceux de Villers.'—Record, A.D. 1401. ' Raoulin plain de mauvais esprit respondit au suppliant, Se tu me hastes, je te battrai tres bien.'—A.D. 1375. ' Be-rart dit à Chauvet que s'il le hatoit que il luy donroit un bouffeau ou buffe.'—A.D. 1404, in Duc. Henschel. Lap. hastet, to challenge to fight, may explain Lat. hostis, an enemy.
ON. etia, to irritate, set on, to contend. At etia oddum, to fight with spears. Etias à einn, maligno affectu concitari in aliquem. At, instigation to fight, contest. Mid.Lat. atia, rancour. With the initial h, OSax. huoti, irritatus, infensus ; AS. hettan, to persecute, pursue, ON. hata, G. hassen, to hate. Goth, hatis, anger, hatyan, to hate. The same equivalence of forms with and without an initial h is seen in OSax. hatol, AS. atol, hateful, cruel. The connection between the ideas of setting on of animals to fight, and the angry passions, is also seen in Gael, stuig, incite, spur on, set dogs to fight (Lat. in-stigare), and Gr. στύγος, hatred.

Hat. ON. höttr ; Fris. hatte.

Hatch.—Hack. Two words of differ-ent derivations are probably confounded. I. To hatch, to fasten, from Du. haeck, a hook, Pl.D. haken, to hook, hold fast. Idt haket, it sticks fast, hæret res ; to-haken, to button.—Brem. Wtb. ' If in our youth we could pick up some pretty estate 'twere not amiss to keep the door hatched.'—Pericles. To this form must be referred the hatches of a ship, the valves which shut down the hold; also hatches, floodgates to stop the course of water.—B. 2. Du. heck, a barrier of lath or trellice-work, a grating, gate, portcullis; E. hatch, a half-door, frequently grated—B.; hack, a rack for hay (a grating of rods through which the hay is pulled down); Sw. häck, a hedge of branches, a palisade, coop for fowls, rack for horses; Fin. häkki, a cage or hurdle made of wattles. The root of this second division seems preserved in Esthon. haggo, bushes, twigs, rods; Fin. hako, g. hawon, fir branches, whence hakeri, a hut of poles, hakuli, a palisade. Walach. hacu, twigs, branches, rods, hätsishu, hätshiugà, brush-wood.

To Hatch. To break the eggshell and allow the young to come out. See Hack.

Hatchel.—Hassel.—Hackle.—Heckle. The toothed instrument for combing flax is widely known by this name throughout Europe. Du. hekel, G. hechel. Fin. hakyla, Walach. hehela, het-sela, Magy. háhel, a heckle. Bohem. hachlowati, wochlowati, to heckle. Probably from the hooks or teeth of which the instrument is composed. 'And yet the same must be better kembed with hetchel-teeth of iron (pectitur ferreis hamis) until it be clensed from all the gross bark and rind.'—Holland, Pliny in R.

Hatchet. Fr. hacher, to hack; hach-ereau, hachette, a hatchet or small axe. Rouchi hape, an axe, hapiete, apiète, a hatchet.

Hate. See Haste.

Hater. Properly a rag, then in a de-preciatory sense a garment. I have but oon hool hater, quod Haukyn, I am the lasse to blame, Though it be soiled and selde clean.—P. P. AS. hateru, clothing; G. hader, a rag, tatter, worn-out clothes; Bav. hand-hadern, handkerchief; prang hadern, frills; hudel, huder, rag, tatter. Pl.D. hadder, tatter, verhaddern, verhiddern, to entangle, ravel. The designation of a rag is commonly taken from the figure of shaking, fluttering in the wind. Thus in E. tatter, to chatter—Hal., Du. tateren, to stammer—Halma, Bav. tattern, to prattle, to shiver, tatternian, a scarecrow (an image of rags fluttering in the wind), we see the advance from the image of a broken sound, a quivering movement, to E. tatter, a rag. In the same way we have Du. hateren, to falter—Kil., hutteren, to stammer—Halma, Sc. hotter, to rattle, shudder, shiver, totter, Swiss hottern, to shake, leading to E. hater, and Bav. hutten, a rag. So also Swiss hudeln, to wabble, dangle, compared with hudel, a rag. See Dud.

Hauberk.—Habergeon. OFr. hau-berc. It. usbergo, Prov. ausberc, from OHG. halsberc, AS. healsbeorg, a coat of mail, from heals, the neck, and beorgan, to cover or defend. The diminutive Fr. haubergeon, a habergeon, is explained by Cotgr. a little coat of mail, or only sleeves and gorget of mail.

Haughty. Formerly haut, hautain, from Fr. haut, high, hauty, lofty; haut à la main, hautain, proud, surly, stately.—Cot. The fader hem louede alle ynog, ac the geongost mest, For heo was best and fairest, and to hautenesse drow lest.—R. G. Such minds as are haute, puffed up with pride. Udal in R. Lat. altus. It. alto, high; altiero, Sp. altivo, haughty.

Haunch. OHG. hlancha, and by the loss of the h, lancha, G. lanke, the flank. On the other hand, by the loss of the l, It. anca, Fr. hanche, the haunch or hip. In the same way the OE. clatch is connected with catch on the one side and latch on the other. See Flank.

Haunt. From Bret. hent (correspond-ing to Goth. sinth, AS. sith), a way, henti, Fr. hanter, to frequent, to haunt.

To Have. Lat. habere, Goth. haban.

Haven. ON. höfn, OFr. havene, havle, mod. havre, a haven; ON. hafna, to re-fuse, abstain, desert; at hafna bodi, to refuse an invitation; vinirnar hafna honum, his friends desert him; at hafna sig (to withdraw from the perils of the sea), to betake oneself to port.

Havock. W. hafog, destruction, waste. Hai hafog! a cry when cows are com-mitting waste in a neighbour's land. Perhaps originally a cry of encourage-ment to a hawk (AS. hafoc) when loosed upon his prey. Cry havock! and let loose the dogs of war.

Haw.—Hawthorn. AS. haga, a hedge, piece of enclosed land, dwelling-house. Hence haga-thorn, hedge-thorn, haw-thorn, the fruit of which are haws. G. hag, a hedge, enclosure, shrub, thicket; hag-apfel, a crab; hage-dorn, hawthorn, dog-rose.
To Haw. To make sounds like haw, haw, between one's words in speaking.
Hawbuck. A Johnny-raw, a silly clown. Swiss holzbock, homo stupidus, incogitans.—Idioticon Bern. in Deutsch. Mundart.
Hawk. AS. hafoc, ON. haukr, G. habicht, OHG. hapuh, W. hebog. Lap. hapak, haukka. Fin. hawikka, haukka. The immediate origin seems preserved in Fin. hawia, voracious, while the ultimate derivation is probably to be found in the root hap, exemplified in Fr. happer, to seize, Lap. hapadet, to grasp at. From the same root hauki, a pike, known for its voracity among fish, as the hawk among birds.
To Hawk. 1. W. hochi, to hawk, to clear the throat. Magy. hák, clearing the throat, phlegm. An imitation of the sound produced. Dan. harke, to hawk, harkla, to spit.
To Hawk. 2. Hawker. A hawker is one who cries his goods for sale about the streets or ways; to hawk, to cry goods for sale. N. hauka, hua, huga, to cry, to shout. Pol. huk, roar, din, clangour; hukad, to whoop, hoot, hallow, W. hw, a hoot, hwa, to hallow, to shout; hwchw! a cry of hollo, a shout, scream; Bret. ioua, ioudha, to cry, to shout; Fr. hucher, Pic. hugiter, to call or cry. Hence Mid.Lat. huccus, uccus, cry; hucagium, or cridagium, criagium, the duty payable on crying the sale of wine. ' Chacun tavernier de St Nicolas est tenu de nous rendre et poier chacun an, pour chacun tonneau que il vend en l'an, maille pour criage, et nous sommes tenus de crier leur vin à leur requeste.'—Record, A.D. 1289, in Duc. Hensch. ' Videlicet quod hucagium seu clamor tabernarum et collatio hucagii seu clamoris in Majoria—et omne jus quod habet in celleriis, et in collatione ejusdem, nobis—libera manebunt.'—A.D. 1269 in Carp.
We might be tempted to explain from this source the designation of the huckster, who went about the town selling and doubtless crying their goods. ' Qe nul hukster estoise en certain lieu mais voisent parmi la vile.'—Liber Albus, 690. But a wider comparison compels us to refer huckster to another source.
Hawser. See Halse.
Hay. Goth. havi, grass; AS. heág, híg, ON. hey, Du. houwe, hauw, hoy (Kil.), grass cut and dried for fodder. Esthon. hain, hay, grass; Fin. heina. Lap. suoine, Lith. szenas, Magy. szena, hay.
Hazard. Sp. azar, unlucky throw on the dice, disaster. It. zara, a die, the game of hazard, an unlucky cast; zara a chi tocca, bad luck to him to whom it falls. Mod.Gr. ζάρι, a die; Alb. zar, a die, luck. Arab. az zahr, a die.
Haze.—Hazy. Haze, a thick fog; it hazes, it misles small rain.—B. Possibly from ON. and AS. has, hoarse, the signification passing on from thickness of voice to thickness of atmosphere.
To Haze.—Hazle. To dry linen.—Hal. ' Those that by that happy wind of thine didst hazle and dry up the forlorn dregs and slime of Noah's deluge.'—Roger's Naaman the Syrian in Trench. Fr. hasler, hâler, to dry in the air, to wither from drought. Rouchi hasi, dried by the heat, burnt. N. hæsa, to dry in the wind, to breathe hard; hæs, a framework for drying hay and corn in the field; Sw. hæs, cocks of hay.
To Heal.—Health.—Holy. G. heil, whole, sound, entire, in good health; heilig, inviolable, inviolate, secure from injury, sacred, holy. Gr. ὅλος, whole, entire. With an initial s instead of h (as in Lat. sal, compared with Gr. ἅλς, W. hal) we have Lat. solus, alone (undivided), parallel with Gr. ὅλος; salvus, sound, and salus (salut'), corresponding to hallow, health. As the healing of a wound is the joining of the skin and covering up of the wound, the word seems connected with AS. helan, to hill or cover, though it is by no means clear that the latter signification is the earliest in the order of development.
Heam. See Hame.
Heap. Pl.D. hoop, G. haufe, ON. hopr, AS. heap, a heap, crowd.
To Hear. Hark! hist! list! are all representatives of a low whispering or rustling sound; then used interjectionally to direct attention to sounds of that nature, and consequently used in the sense of listening, striving to catch sound, using the ears. It is probable that hear may have a like origin. Swiss Hor! an interjection used to still an unquiet ox; Be still! Hence hören, G. aufhören, to cease, be still. Goth. hausjan, to hear.
To Hearken. From hark! with the insertion of an e under the influence of a reference to hear.
Hearse. We find this word applied to the solemn obsequy at funerals, or to a funeral monument. In modern times it is confined to the carriage in which the coffin is conveyed. 'A cenotaph is an empty funeral monument—in imitation of which our hearses here in England are set up in churches during the continuance of a year, or for the space of certain months.'—Weever in Todd.

The gawdy girlonds deck her grave, The faded flowers her corse embrave, O hevie herse!—Shepherd's Cal.

The origin is the Fr. herce, a harrow, an implement which in that country is made in a triangular form, not square as with us. Hence the name of herce or herche was given to a triangular framework of iron used for holding a number of candles at funerals and church ceremonies. Heerce on a dede corce, piramis.—Pr. Pm. ' In reliquis vero festivitatibus quibus accendi solet machina illa ferrea quæ vulgo Erza vocatur, pro illa lampadibus vitreis illustretur.'—Statut. Abbat. Cluniac. in Duc. ' Feriâ quintâ, &c. et sabbato herchia debet esse ad dextrum cornu magni altaris et ibi debent esse 26 cerei illuminati ad matutinas.'—' Volo quod 24 torches et 5 tapers, quolibet taper pondere 10 librarum præparentur pro sepultura mei absque ullo alio hercio.'—Testam. Jonan. de Nevil, A.D. 1386, in Duc. Hensch. 'Cujus quidem sepulturæ seu funeris nostri exequias more regio volumus celebrare, ita quod pro prædictis exequiis iv herciæ excellentiæ convenientes regali—in locis subscriptis per executores nostros præparentur.'—Test. Ric. II. Rymer, vol. 8. 75, in Duc. Hensch.

The quantity of candles being the great distinction of the funeral, the name of the frame which bore them came to be used for the whole funeral obsequies, or for the cenotaph at whose head the candles were placed, and finally for the funeral carriage.

At Poules his masse was done, and diryge In hers royall, semely to royalte. Hardyng, Rich. II. in Way.

Herce, a dede body, corps.—Palsgr.

Heart. Goth. hairto, Gr. Καρδία, Κραδία, Κῆαρ, Lat. cor ('cord'), It. cuore, Fr. cœur, Gael. cridhe, Lith. szirdis, Russ. serdce, Sanscr. hrid, hardi.

Heart of Grace. To take heart of grace or pluck up heart of grace, to be of good heart. I take herte a gresse as one dothe that taketh a sodayne corage upon him. They lyved a grete whyle as cowards, but at the last they took herte a gresse to them.—Palsgr.

Apparently from a punning version of the expression to take a good heart.

HEAT. 'Ficca facca, faint not, hold out, pull up a good heart.'—Fl. I plucke up my herte, or I take good herte to me.—Palsgr.

If thou beest true and honest, And if thou findest thy conscience clear from it, Pluck up a good heart.—B. Jonson. Tale of a Tub, act 3, sc. 2.

Kyng Alisaunder though hym weore wo, He tok a god heorte to.—Alisaunder, 6928.

When the knight perceived that he could escape no 'way—he took a good heart and ran among the thickest.—Dr Faustus, c. 52.

As a stag in good condition (a good hart) was in hunting language called a hart of grease (Grisons vacca da grass, a fat cow), to pluck up a good heart seems to have been punningly converted into plucking up or taking a hart of grease, corrupted, when the joke was no longer understood, into heart of grace.

Hearth. AS. heorð, G. herd, area, floor, hearth. Generally the floor or ground on which any operation is carried on. OG. Herth, the soil. Tacitus (De moribus Germanorum) says, ' In commune Herthum, id est Terram colunt.' Swiss herd, soil, ground, earth ; herdapfel, potato ; herdig, earthen ; herdelen, to have an earthy taste.

Heat.—Hot. ON. hita, hiti, heat, boiling ; heitr, hot, angry ; G. hitze, heat, passion, anger ; heiss, hot, vehement, ardent.

We have seen under Entice that the figure of setting on a dog to fight gives a designation to the act of lighting a fire, and even to the materials of combustion, in Lat. titio, Fr. tison, a fire-brand. And if the same line of inquiry is pushed a little further it will be hard to avoid the conclusion that the G. hitze and E. heat have their origin in the same figure. If the G. hetzen, anhetzen, to set on dogs to fight or attack, to incite, inflame, provoke, Sw. hetsa, to set on, to heat, and the like, stood by themselves, no one would doubt that the idea of heating the passions of the animal was the foundation of the expression. But when we compare the hissing or snarling sounds used in setting on dogs, Fin. has! as! Lap. hos! Serv. osh! Pl.D. hiss! W. hyr! E. ss! st! ts! It. izs! uzz! we find it impossible either to suppose that these are derived from a word signifying heat, or to separate the G. and Sw. forms above mentioned from the other verbs manifestly founded on the cry of instigation. Lap. hasetet, hasketet, hotsalet, Serv. oshkati, N. hirra, Dan. tirre, Pl.D. hissen (E. tiss, to hiss), Sw.

tussa, Du. hisschen, hitschen, hissen, hus- sen (Kil.), It. izzare, uzzare, tizzare, stizzare, to incite, set on, provoke. From izzare, to provoke, we have izza, anger— Fl., and in like manner from G. hetzen, hitze, passion, fury, ardour, heat. Sw. hetsa, to set on, to heat ; hetsig, hot, burning ; hetta, heat, passion.
Heath. Goth, haithi, ἀγριος, the open country ; haithivisks, ἄγριος, wild ; ON. heidi, a waste, heidi jörð, waste, barren land, heath ; haucr, uncultivated land ; G. heide, a heath, waste, barren extent of country ; heide-kraut, heath and other plants that grow on barren wastes. The plant heath is no doubt so named from growing on barren heaths.
Heathen. Goth, haithno, Ἑλληνις, Marc 7. 26. G. heide, a heathen. The word bears a singular resemblance to Gr. ἔθνη, the Gentiles, but if it were derived from that source it must have passed through the form of Lat. Ethnici, which could hardly have produced G. heide. We must then suppose that it is the equivalent of Lat. paganus, meaning originally country people, from Goth, haithi, the open country. Du. heyde, heyden, homo agrestis et incultus, a clown, a pagan, heathen.—Kil.
To Heave. Goth, hafjan, ON. hefia, AS. hebban, G. heben, to lift.
Heaven. AS. heofon, Goth, himins, OHG. himil, heaven, G. himmel, a canopy, an arched or vaulted covering, the sky, heaven. The sound of v and m immediately before an n frequently interchange. Dan. hevne, N. hemna, to revenge ; OSw. jafnan, jamnan, always ; AS. efne, in composition emne, even, equal ; ON. sofna, Sw. somna, to fall asleep ; ON. safna, AS. samnian, to collect. There can then be little doubt that Goth, himins and OSax. hebban, AS. heofon, are from the same root, probably a verb signifying to cover. The word was understood by the Saxons themselves in this sense. ' Sage me for hvilcum thingum heofon sy gehaten heofon ? Ic the sage for thon he beheleth eall thæt hym beufon byth.' Tell me why heaven is called heaven ? I tell you because it covereth all that is beneath it.—Dialogue of Saturn and Solomon. A consciousness of the same meaning is indicated in a passage of Otfrid quoted by Ihre. So himil thekit thaz land. As wide as heaven covers earth. From the same root OSw. himin, the membrane which covers the brain ; himmels korn (for him- lost korn), skinless barley; hemlig, secret, covered. Swiss himmel, skin which forms on the surface of liquids after standing.
Heavy.—Heft. AS. hefig, ON. höfugi; heavy; höfgi, weight, the object of the act of heaving. Heft, weight, pressure.—Hal.
Hecatomb. Gr. Ἑκατόμβη (ἑκατὸν, a hundred, and βοῦς, an ox), a sacrifice of a hundred victims.
Hectic. Lat. hectica, a fever, from Gr. ἑκτικὸς, habitual, from ἔχω, to have, hold.
Hedge. AS. hegge, G. hag, a bush, shrub, thicket, enclosure, hedge ; hecke, a thicket, a quickset hedge. Du. haag, hegghe, a thorn-bush, thicket, hedge, also a hurdle.—Kil. Haag-doorn, hawthorn. Suffolk hetch, a thicket, a hedge. Fin. hako, fir-branches, Esthon. haggo, Walach. haai, bushes, twigs, rods. See Hatch.
To Heed. AS. hedan, Du. hoeden, G. hüten, to keep, guard, observe. Hoeden de beesten, to watch cattle.
Heel. AS. hel, ON. hæll, Du. hiel.
To Heel. AS. hyldan, to incline. ' Hyra andwlitan on eorthen hyldun.' They bent their looks on the earth.—Luc 24. 5. ON. halla, to incline, to lean towards ; hallr, inclined towards, inclination ; hella, to pour—Egilsson; Dan. helde, to slope, decline, lean, to tilt a vessel, to pour. Perhaps this last may be the original sense of the word. To hele, or hell, to pour out.—Hal. ' And belyve he garte helle down the water on the erthe before alle his men.'—MS. Hal. ' Hwon me asaileth buruhwes other castles theo thet beoth withinnen heldeth schaldinde water ut'—pour scald- ing water out.—Ancren Riwle, 246. In the same way Fr. verser, to pour, seems to preserve the original meaning of Lat. vergere, to decline, incline. ' Spuman- tesque mero pateræ verguntur.'—Statius.
Heifer. AS. heafore, E. dial. heckfor, heifker. Hekfere, juvenca—Pr. Pm.; hecforde, a yong cowe, genisse.—Palsgr. Du. hokheling, a heifer, from hok, a pen or cote. The second syllable of heifer may be a modification of G. ferse, a heifer.
Height. See High.
Heinous. Fr. haineux, from haine; malice, hate, rancour ; hair, OFr. hadir, to hate.—Diez.
Heir. OFr. hoir, Lat. hæres.
To Hele.—Hill.—Hile. To cover. Hillier, a tiler. Thei hiled them I telle thee With leves of a fige tree. A poor person says, ' It takes a great deal to hill and fill so many children.' Goth, huljan, G. hüllen, to veil or cover.

to wrap ; hülle, clothing, mantle, cover. ON. hylja, to hide ; G. hülse, the covering of a thing, hull, husk, pod. AS. helan, to conceal, cover.

Hell. The place of the dead, or place where the dead are punished. ON. Hel, death ; Hel, Helia, the Goddess of death. At slá í hel, to strike dead ; hel-blár, death-pale, livid ; hel-blinda, fatal blindness ; hel-sot, death sickness ; hel-víti, the punishment of the dead, whence Dan. helvede, Hell. Magy. halni, to die, halott, a corpse. Gr. θνήσκειν, to die.

Helm. I. Helmet. Goth. hilms, ON. hialmr, G. helm, It. Sp. elmo, Fr. heaume, helmet. NE. helm, a covering.—B. OPtg. elmo, a covering, ' unum elmum laboratum pro super ipsum altare.'—Record, A.D. 1087, in Diez. Perhaps the same notion of protecting may be the root of Du. helm, the creeping grass which protects the sandy shores of Holland.

From AS. helan, ON. hylja, to cover, protect ; hylma, hilma, to cover, hide ; hilming, concealment ; í hilmingu, under pretext ; hilmir, protector, (poet.) king. Lith. szalmas, Russ. schlem, schelom, a helmet.

2. Helme or the rothere of a ship, temo, plectrum.—Pr. Pm. ON. hjálm, hjálmun, rudder ; hjálmviðr, Du. helm-stock, the tiller. In all probability the helm may be the helve or handle by which the ship is managed. OE. halme, handle. Helme of a rothere of a shyppe, la manche du gouvernail.—Palsgr. See Helve.

* Help. Goth. hilpan, ON. hialpa, G. helfen, Lith. szelpti, to help, to take care of ; gelbėti, to help, to save ; gilbti, to receive help ; pagalba, help, assistance. The sense might well be explained from OHG. halpa, halba, side, half. To side with one is to take his part, to help him. So from Fin. puoli, half, side, is formed puollaa, to side with one, to defend him.

Helter-skelter. Sw. huller om buller, hull om bull, hummel um drummel, Pl.D. huller de buller (Danneil), G. holter di polter, halder de qualder, are interjectional expressions representing racket, rattling noise, and thence applied to a noisy, hurried, disorderly mode of action. Sw. buller, noise, rattle, bustle ; G. poltern, to make a hammering noise, to do something with noise and racket, ' Holter-polter ! ein fürchterliches getöse.'—Sanders. For the element skelter compare Sw. skalla, to yell ; Sc. skelloch, Gael, sgal, shriek, yell, howl. 'Halder de qualder aus dem Spanischen übersetzen reicht nicht hin ;' hand over head, without arrangement. — Sanders. See Hurly-burly.

Helve. AS. helf, Bav. helb, helben, halb, Swiss halm, handle of an axe or hammer ; G. hebn, handle of a tool, stock of an anchor. OG. helm-parten, axe with a long handle, halberd.

Hem. The hem of a garment, from the verb to hem, is that which binds round the edges and prevents them from ravelling. It was formerly used in the sense of a border of any kind, and not merely a sewing down of the edge as at present ; fimbria, limbus, ora.—Pr. Pm. It is remarkable that Sw. stämma, to stop, to staunch, also signifies to hem or border.—Rietz. See to Hem.

On the other hand it is possible that hem may be a parallel form corresponding to seam, as W. hal, to Lat. sal, salt ; but the evidence upon the whole points the other way. W. hem, a hem, seam, border. N. Fris. heam, hem ; suum, seam.—Johansen.

To Hem. To confine, surround, enclose.—R. G. hemmen, to stop the motion of a body, to skid the wheel of a waggon, to stop the course of water, to thwart or hinder a proceeding. Sw. hamma, Pol. hamować, to restrain, check, put a stop to ; hamulec, restraint, curb.

The immediate origin is probably the G. interjection of prohibition Hamm ! (Küttn.) or Humm ! (Brem. Wtb.) Stop ! Let it alone ! Hamm holln (in zaum halten), to keep under control.—Danneil. The sound of clearing the throat is represented by the syllable hem ! explained by Worcester, an exclamation of which the utterance is a sort of half-voluntary cough, and which, being the preparation for speaking, is used for the purpose of calling to a person at a distance.

He hemmed audibly twice or thrice, which was known in the family as a sign that he wished the attention of the crowd to be directed to him.—Dyce, Bella Donna, i. 29, 1864.

To hem a person (Du. hemmen, hummen), to call him by crying hem !—B. From thence to the notion of stopping one is a natural transition ; Du. hemmen, sistere, retinere.—Biglotton. We then pass on to the notion of checking, controlling, confining. See Ho.

Hemi-. Gr. ἥμι, signifying half ; ἥμισυς, half.

Hemorrhage. Gr. αἱμοῤῥαγία, a bursting forth of blood, αἷμα, and ῥήγνυμι, to break, burst.

Hemorrhoids. Gr. αἱμοῤῥοΐς, αἱμοῤῥοΐδες.

a gushing of blood (αἷμα, blood, and ῥέω, to flow, ῥόος, a flowing).
Hemp. Lat. cannabis, Du. hennip, G. hanf, ON. hanpr, Lith. kanape.
Hen. A female fowl. ON. hann, he, hun, she ; hani, G. hahn, a cock ; huhn, henne, a hen. Sw. hannar och honor, cocks and hens, males and females. Dan. han, he, male ; han-kat, male cat ; han-spurv, cock-sparrow ; hane, a cock, male of domestic fowl ; hun, she, female of animals, hen of birds. It should be ob-served hun becomes hen in the oblique cases. Pl.D. heeken and seeken, male and female of animals, cock and hen of birds.
Henchman. A supporter, one who stands at one's haunch. So It. fiancare, to flank, by met. to urge or set on ; (in heraldry), to support arms. A sidesman is a parish officer who assists the church-wardens.
Hend.—Hent.—To seize. Goth. fra-us-hinthan, to take captive ; OHG. heri-hunta, AS. huth, capture, prey ; OFris. handa, henda, to seize, ON. henda, to seize, to happen, the connection between these ideas being shown under Happen. ' I hente, I take by violence, or I catch, Je happe.'—Palsgr. Sw. hända, to hap-pen. It is perhaps from this sense of the verb rather than from the noun hand that was formed the OE. hende, courteous, agreeable, in accordance with G. gefal-lig, falling in with the feelings of another, complaisant, agreeable.
The original image is snapping with the jaws at something; Sc. hansh, haunsh, to snap or snatch at, violently to lay hold of.—Jam. ; OFr. hancher, to grasp or snatch at with the teeth.—Cot. ' Men—havyng on her shuldres and on her helmes sharp pikes that if the olifaunt wold oughte henche or catch hem (posset ap-prehendere), the pricks shulde let hem.'—Trevisa in Way.
Hepatic. Gr. ἧπαρ, ἥπατος, the liver.
Heptarchy. Gr. ἑπτά, seven, and ἀρχή, principality.
Her. Adjective of OE. heo, she.
Herald. Fr. hérauld, héraut ; It. araldo. OHG. haren, to shout. See Harrow.
Herb. Fr. herbe, Lat. herba.
Herd. Goth. hairda, ON. hjörð, G. herde, a herd or flock of cattle ; ON. hirða, to keep, preserve, watch, take care of; hirða, hirðingi, Du. herder, Dan. hyrde, G. hirt, a herd, shepherd ; hirten, to tend cattle. Fr. harde, hourde, the village herd, a herd of deer.—Roquef. Cot. The collection of cattle driven or tended by a keeper, or the keeper himself, some-times take their designation from the act of driving, as Gr. ἀγέλη, a herd, from ἄγω, to drive, and in E. a drove of cattle. So from Magy. hajtani, drive, to drive, to pas-ture cattle; hajtsár, a shepherd. Now the driving of cattle is vividly repre-sented by the setting on of dogs and the cries used in exciting them. So from hiss! the cry to a dog, we have Pl.D. hissen, to set on ; de schaap hissen, to collect the sheep by the aid of a dog.—Danneil. In Welsh the cries herr! hyrr! representing the snarl of a dog, are used in hounding him on to fight, whence hyrrio (N. hirra), to set on a dog, and ap-parently hyrddio, to irritate, to impel, to push, to drive.—Lewis. Roquefort gives houre! as a cry to animate a dog, ex-plaining Rouchi hourder un chien, Fr. harer un chien (Cot.), to set on a dog; and as the last of these forms seems to give rise to Fr. harelle, a herd, so from harer, hourder, w. hyrrio, hyrddio may perhaps be explained harde, hourde, herd.
Here. See He.
-here. -hes. Lat. hærco, hæsi, to stick. Adhere, to stick to ; Adhesive, having a tendency to stick to; Cohere, to stick together.
Hereditary.—Heritage. Lat. hæres, hæredis, an heir, Fr. héritage.
Heresy.—Heretic. Gr. αἵρεσις (αἱρέω, to choose, take), a choosing, an opinion, a sect.
Heriot. AS. here-geata, wig-geat, wig-geatwe, warlike habiliments, from here or wig, war, and geatwe, apparatus.
Hi in wig-geatawum Aldrum nethdon.
They in warlike habiliments ventured their lives.—Beowulf.
The latter part of the word is identical with Lith. gátawos, ready ; Walach. gata, ready, complete ; gati, to prepare ; gatire, apparatus.
Hermit. Gr. ἐρημίτης, a dweller in the wilderness, a solitary, from ἔρημος, waste, lonely. Fin. erd, journey, fishing or hunt-ing expedition ; erämaa (maa, land, region), distant station, desert, unculti-vated place.
Hero. The Gr. ἥρως may probably be the equivalent of Lat. vir. The primitive sense seems preserved in Fin. uros, adult male, male of animals, brave man, man exhibiting the manly character in an eminent degree ; uro-teko (teko = act), factum heroicum.
Heron.—Egret. The AS. hragra ex-hibits the most comprehensive form of the name, whence, on the one hand, G. reiger, Du. reier, and on the other Sw. hågr, Dan. heire. The augmentative termination produces It. aghirone, airone, Fr. egron (—Vocab. de Berri), hairon, heron, in contradistinction to aigrette, egrette (with the dim. termination), the small heron or egret. Fr. heronceau, a young heron, gives E. heronshaw.
The origin of the name is probably the harsh cry of the bird. W. cregyr, a screamer, a heron ; creg, hoarse.
Herring. Fr. hareng, G. haring.
Hesitate. Lat. hæsitare, freq. from hæreo, to stick, stick fast.
Hetero-. Gr. ἕτερος, other, as in heterodox, of another (δόξα) opinion ; heterogeneous, of another (γένος) kind.
To Hew. ON. hoggva, to strike, to cut ; AS. heawian, Du. hauwen, G. hauen, to hew. E. dial. hag, to hack. See Haggle.
Hex-. Gr. ἕξ, six ; hexagon, having six (γωνία) angles ; hexameter, having six (μέτρον) measures.
Hey-day.—Hoity-toity. G. Heyda ! Heysa ! exclamations of high spirits, active enjoyment. Hence E. hey-day, the vigour and high spirits of youth, where the spelling is probably modified under an erroneous impression that there is something in the meaning of the word which indicates a certain period of life.
At your age The heyday of the blood is tame, it's humble, And waits upon the judgment.
In the same way Sw. hojta, to shout, explains E. hoit, to indulge in riotous and noisy mirth—Webster ; to hite up and down, to run idle about the country—Hal. ; highty-tighty, frolicsome, thoughtless. — Thomson. ' He lives at home, and sings and hoits and revels among his drunken companions.'—B. and F. Cotgrave explains estre en ses gogues, to be 'frolic, lusty, all a-hoit, in a merry mood. Il est à cheval, he is set on cock-horse, he is all a-hoit, he now begins to flaunt it.—Cot.
Hence hoity-hoity, and in a somewhat weaker sense hey-day, are frequently used as exclamations implying that the person addressed is all a-hoit, in an excited state, or is assuming airs unsuitable to his position. Hoity-toity ! Well to be sure !
We have in this exclamation the origin of Fr. hait, liveliness, gladness ; haiter, to cheer up, to like well of, dehaiter, to discourage, to be ill at ease, souhaiter, to wish for, which has given much trouble to etymologists.
In Pembrokeshire to hite is commonly used in the sense of cheer or encourage.
Hibernate. Lat. hyems, winter ; hibernus, wintry ; hiberno, to pass the winter.
Hicket—Hiccup.—Hiccough. Du. hik, hickse, hickup, Bret. hik, Fr. hoquet, OE. sniccup, hiccup. Du. hikken, snikken, hicksen, OE. yex, to sob. All direct representations of the sound.
Hide. G. haut, Du. huyd, ON. húð, Lat. cutis, Gr. σκῦτος, skin of a beast. ON. hyda, to skin a beast, to give a hiding or flogging.
To Hide. To conceal, to cover. Du. hoeden, hueden, to keep, protect, cover, W. huddo, to cover, shade, darken. N. hide, the lair of a beast, hide seg (of a bear), to seek covert ; ON. hýð-björn, a bear in hibernation.
Hide of Land. As much as could be tilled by a single plough. The word is still used as a measure of land in Norway.
Hideous. Frightful. OFr. hide, hisde, hidour, hisdour, dread.
Tel hide en a et telle fréour Car se laisse de paour.
Fab. et Contes, I, 354.
Kant ele vit le cors sans vie Hidor ot de ce qu'ele vit.—Ib. 4, 324.
La forès estoit hisdouse et fade, the forest was grisly and enchanted.—Diez.
La char par hidour en homme fremist, flesh in man quakes for dread.—Biblesworth.
Two derivations are suggested ; first, from Lat. hispidosus, bristly, rough, hisp'dus, hisdos, as male-sapidus, -sapidus, Fr. mau-sade ; vapidus, Fr. fade. This derivation is supported by OFr. hispide, which is explained by Roquefort, sale, vilain, degoutant, hideux, affreux. On the other hand it would be more satisfactory if an origin could be found in a word signifying dread or horror. In this point of view we have Goth. agis, OHG. agi, ege, AS. ege, fear, dread ; OHG. egidi, egiso, AS. egisa, MHG. egese, eise, horror ; OHG. egelih, agislih, MHG. egelich, egeslich, eislich, Du. heiselich, heisig, eyselick, eysig, horrible ; eysen, ijsen, to shudder ; Da. hæslig, horrible, hideous ; Sw. hisna, to shudder. The adoption of an initial h in the Du. and Scandinavian forms and in Fr. hisdeux, hideux, would be analogous to the course in G. heischen, MHG. heischen, eischen, from OHG. eiscôn, to demand, where the initial h appears in the course of the 13th century.
To Hie. AS. higan, higian, to endeavour, to hasten ; higen, diligent.

HIERO-pant is explained by Richardson, to blow quickly and shortly, and consequently, to pursue eagerly, to desire with strong emotion; and our present word affords another example of the same train of thought. Du. hiighen, to pant; Dan. hige, hive, hie efter veiret, to pant, to gasp for breath; hige, to pant for, to covet. In the same way the Lat. aveo, to desire earnestly, to strive for, seems connected with Gr. ἄω, to breathe. Higan, like E. sigh, is a direct imitation; W. igian, to sigh, to sob.

Hiero-. Gr. ἱερός, sacred. Hieroglyphics (γλύφω, to engrave), sacred sculptures. Hierarchy, sacred governance.

High.— Height. AS. heah, Goth. hauks, ON. há, G. hoch, W. uchel, high.

Higler.— To Higgle. Higler, one who carries about provisions for sale.— Webster. Hegler, one who buys provisions brought up out of the country in order to sell them again by retail.—B. To higgle, to chaffer, to be nice and tedious in making a bargain.—Webster. To higgle is to haggle about petty matters, and if higler and higgle stood by themselves we should without hesitation regard higgle as the original and explain it as a diminutive of haggle. But the comparison of the G. correlatives seems to show that higgle is derived from higler rather than the converse.

Bav. hugkler, hugkner. Swab. hukler, huker, Du. hoecker, hucker, Pl.D. hóker, G. hóke, hóker, an engrosser, huckster, provision-dealer; Westerwald hütschler, Nassau hitzler, one who carries about meal or corn in sacks on a horse for sale. Swiss hodeln, hudeln, to traffic in corn; korn-hudler, an engrosser, regrater of corn, corn-broker. Bav. hodeln, to drive a petty trade; hödl-pauern, peasants going to load salt, who bought up corn on their route and carried it to dispose of at their market. Alsace hutzeln (Westerwald. Idiot), Swab. hocklen, to carry on the back; Pl.D. huck-bak, hukke-bak, pickaback. See Huckster.

Higre.— Eager.— Aker. The commotion occasionally made in certain rivers by the meeting of the tide and current is known by the foregoing names. Akyr of the sea flowynge, impetus maris.—Pr. Pm. Taylor the water poet describes the phenomenon on the coast of Lincolnshire, —The flood runs there with such great force, That I imagine it outruns a horse; And with a head some four foot high that roars, It on the sodaine swells and beats the shores; It hath lesse mercy than beare, wolfe, or tyger, And in those countries is called the hyger.
Taylor in Nares.

Any sudden inundation of the sea is called an egor, at Howden in Yorkshire. —Kennet in Hal. From ON. Ægir, the god of the sea, then used for the sea itself ægja, to frighten; ægir, terrifier; ægiligr, terrible.

Hilarity. The root of Lat. hilaris, cheerful, seems preserved in Fin. hilaan, hillata, ludibundus strepo, lætus tumultuo; hilastaa, strepens ludo ut pueri; hilaus, strepitus lusorius.

Hill. Du. heuvel, hovel, G. hügel, hill. Pl.D. hull, gras-hull, a mound, tuft of grass growing more luxuriant than the rest.—Brem. Wtb. Du. hobbel, a rising, unevenness in the ground.—Danneil. It would seem that the radical notion is what is heaved up. Fris. Hovel, hoevel, a tumour, hunch in the back.—Kil.

Hilt. ON. hjalt, the guard of a sword at each end of the handle; fremra hjaltit, the guard or cross-bar which protected the hand, and efra hjaltit, the knob or pummel which prevented the sword from being dragged out of the hand; hjölt (plur.), the two together or entire handle. Hilt, garde de l'épée.— Sherwood. Du. hille, hilte, holte, holde (Kil.), OG. helza, hiltze, hültz, holcz (Dief. Sup. in v. capulus), Boh. gjlce, hilt; It. elza, elso, guard of a sword.

Hind. 1. ON. hindarf, a female deer. G. hinde, hindinn.

Hind. 2.— Behind.— Hinder. G. hinten, hinter, behind. The structure of his own body constitutes the ultimate standard of position to every individual, and thus the different members of our bodily frame might be expected to supply the figures by which the relations of place are expressed. In E. accordingly we make use of the head, foot, face, hand, side, back, in expressing those relations. The oblique cases of Fin. korwa, the ear, or pää, the head, are used adverbially to express the relations of beside or above. In like manner from hänta, Esthon. händ, the tail, are formed expressions connected with the idea of what is behind; Fin. hännittää, to follow; häntyri, a follower; hännässä, behind; Esthon. hännaliste, from behind, reversed. Hence we may explain behind as signifying at the tail or back of. The hinder end is the end at the tail of. To hinder is to put one backwards. So from Galla dubo, tail, duba, behind, after, in time or space.

Hind. 3.— Hine. A servant, husbandman, peasant. AS. hina, hine (for higna, higne), a domestic; hine-ealdor, the good-man of the house; hine-man, a farmer, higna-fæder, paterfamilias. The word properly signifies member of a family, in which sense the Sw. hjun is used at the present day. De äro fyra hjon i hushållet, they are four persons in household. Tjenstehjon, man or maid servant; ar-beds-hjon, labourer. Hence elliptically E. hine, a domestic labourer. ON. hion, family; N. hjon, married pair. Compare Lat. famulus with familia.
From AS. hige, hiwa, family; hiwen, servants. See Hive.
Hind-berry. G. him-beere, the rasp-berry. As the name of hart-berry, AS. heort-berg, now corrupted to whortle-berry, -whorts or hurts, was given to what is otherwise called the bilberry, the rasp-berry was named after the female of the same animal, or hind.
Hinge. The hooks on which the door is hung. OE. hing, to hang. Du. henghen, to hang; henghe, henghene, hook, handle, hinge.—Kil.
Hint.—Inkling. The meaning of both these words is a rumour or a whisper of some intelligence. Parallel with E. hum, representing a murmuring sound, the ON. has uma (without the initial h), to resound; ymia (ymdi), to whizz, whistle; ymta, to whisper or rumour. Hann ymti á thvi, suspicionem dedit, he gave a hint, an inkling of it. Ymtr, rumour evulgatus, a hint. Dan. ymte, to whisper, talk softly, secretly of. Sw. hafva hum om något, to have an inkling or a hint of something. For the change from ymte to hint compare emmet, ant.
Inkling is from a frequentative form of the same root, ON. uml, Dan. ymmel, murmur, ymple, to whisper, to rumour—Molbech, whence E. inkling, by a change analogous to that which holds between G. sumpfen and E. sink; G. schrümpfen and E. shrink.
Hip. G. hüfte, Du. heupe, the hip, flank, thigh. N. hupp, the flank. Sc. hips, the buttocks.
Hip.—Hep. The fruit of the rose. N. hjupa, kjupa, Sw. hjupon, Dan. hybe, AS. hiop.
Hippopotamus. Gr. ἱπποπόταμος; ἵππος, a horse, and ποταμός, river.
Hire. AS. hyre, Du. huur, G. heuer, W. hiir, wages, payment for service.
To Hiss. Hiss, whizz, fizz, are imitations of the sound represented. E. dial. to tiss, to hiss. Piedm. issé, sissé, to hiss on a dog.

Hist!—Whist!—Hush! An interjection demanding silence and attention. A person in a savage state of society apprehending nocturnal danger would have his attention on the stretch to catch the faint rustling sounds made by the most cautious approach of an enemy. Hence in order to intimate to his own friends his desire for silence and attention he would imitate the sounds for which he is on the watch, by such forms as st! hist! whist! representing the sounds made by movement of any kind, whisper, mutter; w. ust, hist, or hust, silence.
Let her yelp on, be you as calm 's a mouse, Nor let your whisht be heard into the house.
Ferguson in Jam. w. hust, a low buzzing noise; husting, a whisper, mutter; ust, a hist or hush, a silence. 'After janglinge wordes cometh huiste, peace and be stille.'—Chaucer. It. zitto, a slight sound; non fare un zitto, not to let a whist be heard; zitto! hush! Piedm. sissè, E. dial. tiss, to hiss; Du. sus! tus! hush! sus, silence. Dan. tys! hush! tysse, to hush, to silence.
History. Gr. ἱστορία; ἵστωρ, one knowing, fully acquainted, from ἵστημι, I know.
Histrionic. Lat. histrio, a stage-player.
To Hit. ON. hitta, to light on, to find. Their hittuz á veginom, they met in the way. Compare Fr. trouver, to find, with G. treffen, to hit. Bav. hutzen, to strike. Die böck hutzen an einander, butt against each other. Illyr. hitati, to cast, throw.
Hitch.—Hotch. Hitch, motion by a jerk; also a loop. To hotch, to move the body by sudden jerks.—Jam. Hotchin and lauchin, Swiss gehotzelt seyn, laughing till one shakes. Bav. hutschen, to rock, to hitch oneself along like children on their rumps. Du. hutsen, hutselen, to shake, to jumble. Fr. hocher, to shake. Swiss hotschen, to hiccup; hoschen, to knock; hotteren, hotzen, hotzeln, hotzern, to shake, to jog, jolt. Bav. Hott! hott! syllables by which is expressed the trot of a horse or the jogging movement of his rider. Hotteln, to jolt.
Hithe. AS. hyth, a port, haven.
Hither. See He.
Hive. Goth. hœiv, ON. hiu, family, household; hion (pl.), family, husband and wife. AS. hige, higo, hiwa, a household, family; höner-hive, a hen's-nest. Hence a hive of bees, the swarm which constitutes one family or household. Du. houwen, houden, houwelicken, hijlicken, to marry. AS. hiwræden, a family, G. heurath, marriage.

— Hoa. — Whoa. A cry to stop horses. Hence to ho, to stop, to cease. Fr. ho, interjection to impose silence or stop an action.—Roquef.
O my dere moder, of thy wepyng ho, I you beseche do not, do not so,—D. V.
And at a stert he was betwixt hem two, And pulled out a sword and cried, Ho! No more, up peine of lesing of your hed. Chaucer.
Out of all ho, beyond all restraint.

Hoaming sea. A foaming sea.
Vent. What a sea comes in! Mast. It is a hoaming sea. We shall have foul weather.—Dryden, Tempest in R.
Much of the French that has passed into English belongs to the Walloon or Burgundian dialect, where an initial s or sch is generally replaced by an h. Thus Wal. hauder is the Fr. échauder, E. scald; Wal. houti, Fr. escouter, E. scout; Wal. houvion, Fr. escouvillon, a clout. In the same way the G. schaum, Fr. escume, corresponds to Wal. houm, to scum the pot; houmress, a scummer—Remacle, leaving no doubt that a hoaming sea is a foaming sea, although we do not apply the term scum to that element. G. see-schaum, the foam of the sea.

Hoard. 1. Goth. huzd, treasure, OHG. hort, AS. hord, treasure; breost-hord, the soul, the treasure of the breast; Swiss hord-reich, very rich.
2. A hoarding is a fence of boards. Probably from Fris. schardinge, separation, by the same change which is seen in Wall. hård, from ON. skard, Du. schaerde, a breach, separation, fragment. 'Alle schardinge, dat is schedinge tuschen den huisern und tuinen sall men maeken van plancken.' All divisions between houses and gardens shall be made of planks.—Ost Fris. Landrecht. in Brem. Wtb. in v. scherung. See Hoaming.

Hoarse. AS. and ON. hás, G. heiser, Du. heesch, O Flanders heersch, hoarse. Hoos, hoarse, raucus.—Pr. Pm. E. dial. hooze, a difficult breathing in cattle; hoazed, hoarse.—Hal. N. hæsa, to pant, breathe hard, to wheeze.

Hoary. AS. har, hoary. ON. hæra, a mattress, gray hair; Fr. haire, a hair shirt; ON. hærðr, comatus, haired, also gray-haired, hoary; at hærast, to become hoary; hærulangr, having long hair; hæru-kall (kall, old man), a gray-haired man.
The sense of hoary then would seem to arise from a singular ellipse.

* Hoax. AS. husc, hose, OS. hosk, OE. hux, sarcasm, taunt, jeer. When the Romans demanded tribute of Arthur he sent them instead the body of their king on a rich bier, 'and grette Rom-weres alle mid græten huxe;' and said that he had sent them the tribute of the land.—Layamon iii.

Hob.—Hobble. The image originally represented is action by a succession of efforts, as Sc. habble, to stammer or stutter; E. hobble, to limp, to move unevenly by broken efforts; hob, a false step, an error.—Hal. Du. hobbelen, to stammer, to jolt, to rock as a boat; Bav. hoppelen, hoppern, hoppen, to jog up and down, as a bad rider on a trotting horse. The expression is then transferred to what produces a hobbling motion, Du. hobbelig, E. dial. hobbly, rough, uneven; hobbles, rough stones; hob or hub, a projection. The hob of a fire-place is the raised stone on either side of the hearth between which the embers were confined. Hub, the projecting nave of a wheel, a thick square sod, an obstruction of anything, the mark to be thrown at quoits, the hilt of a weapon.—Hal.

In another direction the sense of a jolting, clumsy gait suggests the idea of clumping shoes, or of the clown who walks with such a gait. Thus hobnails are the nails set in the thick soles of a country shoe, thence transferred to the nails of a horseshoe; hob-prick, a wooden peg driven into the heels of shoes.—Hal. Hob, hob-clunch, a country clown.—Hal. A hob or clown, piedgris.—Sherwood. Hob-goblin, a clownish goblin, a goblin who does laborious work, where the first syllable is commonly taken as the short for Halbert or Robert.

Hobbedehoy. A youth not yet come to man's estate, otherwise written hobbityhoy, hobbledehoy. Perhaps considered as a young cock. Gakerdihæ, the cry of the cock.—Dialect of Henneberg in Franconia. Deutsch. Mundart. iii. 407.

To Hobble or Hopple horses. See Hamper.

Hobby.—Hobby-horse. The horse is commonly named in children's language from the cries used in the management of the animal. Thus in E. the cry with which we are most familiar is gee! to make a horse go, and the nursery name for a horse is geegee. In Germany hott is the cry to make a horse turn to the right (or generally to urge it to exertion), ho to the left, and the horse is called hotte-pard (Danneil), huttjen-ho-peerd (Holstein. Idiot.), hottihuh (Stalder), as in Craven highty, from the cry hait! In

Finland humma, the cry to stop or back a horse, is used in nursery language for the horse itself. The cry to back a horse is in Westerwald hüff whence houfe, to go backwards. Devonshire haap! or haap back! Dan. dial, hoppe dig! back! From the cry thus used in stopping a horse are formed Craven houpy, Fris. hoppe, a horse in nursery language—Outzen; Holstein hüppe-peerdken, and E. hobby-horse, a child's wooden horse. It is apparently from this source that we must explain Esthon. hobbo, hobben, Lap. hapos, Gr. ἵππος, a horse, G. hoppe, a mare, Fr. hobin, E. hobby, a little ambling horse, and hobelers, hobiners, the light horsemen mounted on such horses.

Hock.—Hough. Hock, the joint of a horse's leg from the knee to the fetlock; hough, the back of the knee. AS. hoh, the heel, ham (calx, poples, suffrago), hoh-fot, hoh-spor, heel, hoh-scanc, the leg, hoh-sin, the ham-string, sinew of the knee. G. hakse, haxe, the knuckle or foot-joint of the hind leg in horses, &c.—Kütn. To hock, hough, hockle, hox, to cut the hamstring. To hox is also to scrape the heels and knock the ankles in walking.—Hal.

The radical signification is probably the member used in kicking; hoh-sin, the sinew exerted in kicking. To hock, to kick (Lincolnshire).—Latham. G. hacken, to dig, break with a pick, peck like a bird; hacke, the heel.

Hocus-pocus. Hocus-pocus (Du. ho-kus-bokus—Halma; Fr. hoccus-bocus) is the gibberish repeated by the juggler all over Europe when he performs his tricks. It has been supposed that they are a jeer at the sacramental words hoc est corpus, but it is most improbable that the juggler (whose interest it is to please everybody) should have made his performances the vehicle of a flagrant outrage on Catholic feeling.

Perhaps the rigmarole may have arisen from Pol. huk, puk, noise, bustle, clatter. Narobić! huka-puka, to raise a bustle.

Hod. A tray for carrying mortar; a coal-scuttle. Fr. hotte, a scuttle, dosser, basket to carry on the back—Cot.; G. hotte, a dorser in which grapes are gathered.

Perhaps the radical idea may be shown in Sc. hot, a small heap of any kind; a hot of muck, as much dung as is hodded or jogged down in one place. Huddel, a heap; to hud, to collect into heaps.—Hal. The hod is then the basket in which a hot of dung or of mortar is carried. Sc. hut, a square basket used in carrying out dung to the field, of which the bottom is opened to let the contents fall out.—Jam.

To Hod. To jog. Here farmers, gash in riding graith, Gaed hoddin by their fellows.—Burns. To hoddle, to waddle.—Jam. To hodge, to ride gently.—Hal. Bav. hott! hott! sound by which they express the jogging of a trotting horse or of his rider. See Halt.

Hoddipeak. What ye brain-sick fools, ye hoddy-peaks, ye doddy-poules.—Latimer in Nares. They count peace to be the cause of idleness, and that it maketh men hodipekes and cowards.—Christopherson, 1554. Ibid.

Du. hoddebek, hobbelbek, stammelbek (bec pour bouche—Dict. du bas Lang.), a stammerer. As hobbelen is to stammer, as well as to jolt or jog, and the senses of broken speech and broken impulsive movement are commonly united, it is only in accordance with the general analogy that the element hod, which has just been seen in the sense of jog, should signify stammer in the compound hodde-bek.

* Hodgepodge.—Hotchpot. Hodgepodge or hotchpotch has the appearance of a native term significant of a mash, the materials of which have lost their original form in the pasty consistency of the mass. He thrusteth them in together, making of them an hoche-poche, all contrarye to the wholesome doctryne of Saynt Paule.—Bale in R.

In these rhyming forms we should look for the root of the expression to the second element. We find accordingly E. dial. pudge, podge, a puddle; G. patschen, pantschen. Swab. batschen, Hesse batschen, to dabble in the wet, to splash, to tramp in mud and melting snow; bätsch-wetter, or hätsche-bätsch, sloshy weather of rain and melting snow; G. putsch, puddle, mud; pantsch, a mixture of liquors, a mash; Banff. potch, a puddle, a disordered condition of affairs; to potch, to trample into mud, to walk through water or mud in a dirty manner, to work in a liquid or semi-liquid in a dirty manner. The reduplicative hotchpotch conveys the idea of continued patching, of a thorough potch. Bav. hetsche petsch, haws boiled with sugar to a pap.

The reduplicative form of the word is lost in Fr. hochepot, a gallimaufrey, a confused mass of many things jumbled together.—Cot. Here then, as in Du. hutsepot, a haricot or stew of chopped.

meat and vegetables, the word seems to be borrowed, and from Fr. again to have come back to us in the shape of hotchpot. Hotchepotte, tripotaige; hotchepotte of many meates, haricot.—Palsgr. Ye hau cast alle hir wordes in an hotchepot. Chaucer. In legal phrase a child is said to bring his special property into hotchpot when he mixes it up with the common inheritance and takes share and share with the other children.

Hoe. Fr. houe, hoe, or, as it was spelt by Evelyn, haugh. Fr. houer, to dig up, break up ground with a hoe. Du. houwer, a pick or hoe, from houwen, to hew, to hack.

Hog. Bret. hoc'h, houc'h, swine, from houdha, to grunt. So Lap. snorkeset, to grunt; snorke, a pig; Fin. naskia, to make a noise like pigs in eating (G. schmatzen); naski, a call for pigs, a pig. ' In driving or any way persuading this obstinate race, we have no other imperative than hooe, hooe, in a deep nasal, guttural tone appropriately compounded of a groan and a grunt.'—Moor, Suffolk Words, in v. sus. sus. It is remarkable that these latter syllables are used in calling pigs to their swill, agreeing with Lat. sus, while the old cry, mentioned by Latimer, of pur, pur, puts us in mind of porcus; ON. purka, a sow.

Hog.—Hoggel.—Hoggrel.—Hogget.—Hoggaster. A young sheep of the second year. Devonshire, Hog-colt, a yearling colt. Du. hokkeling, a heifer, beast of one year old. From being fed in the hok or pen. Honde-hok, a dog kennel; schaapen-hok, a sheep cote.

Hoggins. Sand sifted from the gravel to be laid on roads. From the jogging motion of the sieve. ON. hagga, to move, to jog.

Hogshead. A measure for liquids. Du. ochshood, oghshood, Sw. oxhufwud.

Hoiden. A rampant, ill-bred, clownish wench.—B. But it was not confined to the female sex. Another form of heathen, Du. heyden, homo agrestis et incultus; heydensch, agrestis, incultus, paganus.—Kil.

To Hoise.—Hoist. Fr. hisser, Sw. hissa, Dan. heise, to hoist, distinct from Fr. hausser. It. alzare, E. halse or hawse, to raise, from Lat. altus. The origin of hisser may be a representation of the heavy breath accompanying a violent tug at a rope. Lang. isso! cry of men pushing or pulling at a heavy load. Anen toutes! isso! All at once! Pull!—Dict. Castr. But as the cry is used for the purpose of animating each other to the work, it may be one of the numerous derivatives from the figure of setting on a dog. Bret. issa, or hissa, to set on, to push, and, in nautical language, to hoist.—Dict. Lang.

Hold.—Hull. The hold of a ship, the hollow part, from Du. holte, abstract of hol, hollow, as truth of true. Het hol, de holte van't schip, the hollow space, the whole curvature of the ship.—Père Marin. Accident has in E. appropriated hold to the inside, hull to the outside aspect of the body. Sc. how, hollow, the hold of a ship. The hate fyre consumes fast the how, Ouer all the schip discendis the perellous low. D. V.

To Hold. AS. healdan, Sw. halla, to keep, observe, hold. ON. halla, guard, custody, support, opinion. Du. houden, G. halten, to keep, preserve, observe. See Behold.

Hole.—Hollow. Du. hol, G. hohl, hollow; hohle, Du. hol, a cave, den, hole; holle stemme, a hollow voice, vox fusca, non clara—Kil. From the dull sound of hollow things. Fin. hollata, holista, cavum sonum edo, to give a hollow sound; wesi holaa, aqua cum sono et copiose fluit; waki holaa, the crowd murmurs. Hollastaa, to murmur; hollottaa, to speak confusedly; holina, a hollow sound, confused murmur, noise of waves or of people talking; holo, anything hollow; holo-puu, a hollow tree.

Holiday. See Holy.

Holly. AS. holegn, OE. hollen, W. celyn.

Hollyhock. Rose d'outremer, the garden mallows, called hocks and hollyhocks.—Cot. W. hocys, AS. hoc, mallows. The hollyhock was doubtless so called from being brought from the Holy Land, where it is indigenous. He leaped across the dry bed of the winter torrent, and soon returned in triumph with a large bright trophy of pink hollyhocks.—Domestic Life in Palestine, 323.

Holm. An island; a hill or fenny ground encompassed with brooks—B.; deposit of soil at the confluence of rivers.—Hal. N. holm, a small island; a spot distinguished from the surrounding land, bit of grass among corn; separate bit of pasture. Du. holten, a mount, sand-bank, river island. AS. holm, water, sea; holm-ærn, an ocean-house, ship. Holmas dælde Waldend ure. Our Lord divided the waters.

Holocaust. Gr. ὁλόκαυστον; ὅλος, the whole, and καίω, to burn (in sacrifice).
Holograph. Gr. ὁλογραφεῖν, to write all in one hand; ὅλος, entire, whole.
Holster. Now confined to a case for pistols. Du. holster, a case for pistols, soldier's knapsack. AS. heolster, a den, cave, hiding-place, from helan, to cover, as ON. blomstr, a flower, from bloma, to bloom. He sette theostra heolstur; posuit tenebras latibulum suum.
I wol herborowe me There I hope to hulstred be, And certainly sickerest hyding Is under humblest clothing.—R. R. 6145.
Holy. ON. heilagr; G. heilig, Du. heylig. From G. heil, Du. heyl, health. See Hail.
Holiday, Du. heyligh-dagh, a day to be kept sacred, unpolluted by work.
Homage. The acknowledgment of the tenant under the feudal law that he was his Lord's man, in the terms, ' Devenio vester homo.' Thence applied to any tribute of respect to a superior.
Home. See Hamlet.
Homicide. Lat. homicida; homo, and cædo, to slay.
Homily. Gr. ὁμιλία, the act of inter-course with one, conversation, discourse; from ὅμιλος, an assembly.
Homo-. Homoeo-. Gr. ὁμός, common, joint, agreed; ὅμοιος, like, resembling. Homogeneous, Homologous, &c.
Hone. A fine kind of whetstone, N. hein, hein-bryni, Sw. dial. hjon, a hone, W. hogi, to incite, set on, to sharpen; hogalen, hogfaen, a whetstone. Fin. hioa, hiowa, to sharpen; hiwua, to be rubbed, worn, polished.
Honest. Lat. honestus, from honos, honour, respect.
Honey. Du. G. honig, ON. hunang.
Honour.—Honourable. Lat. honor, honorabilis.
Hood. A covering for the head. Pl.D. hoden, hoen, G. hüten, to keep, guard; Pl.D. hode, G. huth, guard, keeping; Pl.D. hood, G. hut, a covering for the upper part of a thing, a hat. Finger-hut, a thimble; licht-hut, an extinguisher. Pl.D. hodjen, hütjen, a hood. Du. hoeden, to keep, cover, protect; hoed, hat, hood.
-hood. ON. hattr, manner, custom; hátta, to use, to be wont. Bav. hait, the condition of a thing; von jünger hait auf, from youth or youth-head up. Lediger hait, unmarried state. OHG. heit, person, manner. Alio thrio heiti, all three persons. Zi niheineru heiti, in no wise. AS. had, person, sex, habit, state, orders. Thu ne besceawast nanes mannes had, regardest no man's person or condi-tion. Had oferhogedon halgan lifes, de-spised a state of holy life.—Cædmon. Butan halgum hadum, out of holy orders.
Hoof. Du. hoef, Dan. hov.
Hook. Du. hoeck, haeck, Pl.D. hake, Pol. and Boh. hak, a hook. Related to Gr. ὄγκος, ἀγκύλος, ἄγκυρα, ἀγκών, bend, hook, ὄγκος, bend, hook, and Lat. uncus, crooked, angulus, a hook, corner.
Hoop. Du. hoep, hoepel, ring, hoop. Hoepelken, a bunch of flowers. Hoop, a heap, crowd, globe. Swiss hüpp, huupp, convex; hupi, a knob; Fr. houpe, a tuft.
To Hoop.—Whoop. Fr. houper, Swiss hopen, hupen, huuppen, to call out; Bret. hopa, to call to a distance. AS. wop, out-cry, lamentation; Fris. wop, cry, wopa, to call; Goth. wopjan, to crow as a cock; ON. op, clamour, cry. Gr. ὀπή, ὀπός, voice.
To Hoot. To cry like an owl; to make a cry of derision or contempt. Fin. hutaa, to shout, to call; huuto, clamour, vociferation. N. hut, cry to silence a dog. W. hwt! off with it, away! hwtio, to hiss out. Gael. ut! ut! interjection of disap-probation or dislike. N. hussa, to frighten or drive out with noise and outcry. Bav. huss! huss! cry to set on a dog, also to drive away dogs, pigs, or birds; Swiss huss! cry of setting on a dog or hissing a man; huss use! out! off with you! pro-perly to dogs, then to men.
To Hop. G. hüpfen, N. hoppa, Du. hoppen, hoppelen, huppelen, hobben.—Kil. From the figure of broken speech, or speech by a succession of distinct efforts, we express the idea of motion by a succession of muscular efforts, or of hopping, as distinguished from equable motion. Sc. hobble, habber, Swed. happla, to stammer, stutter; E. hobble, to limp; Bav. hoppelen, hoppern, hoppen, to jog up and down. Here, as in so many other cases, the frequentative is the ori-ginal form of the word, from whence we arrive at the apparent radical hop, ex-pressing a single muscular effort. ' It is usual to cry to a stumbling man or beast Hop! Hop!'—Küttner. It is also used to represent the successive beats of con-tinued action.
Hurre! Hurre! Hop! Hop! Ging's fort in sausendem galopp!
Hop. G. hopfen, Du. hoppen, Fr. hou-blon, OFlem. hommel; ON. humall, hops.
Hope. G. hoffen, Du. hopen. In OE. the word was used in the sense of simple expectation without reference to any plea-sure to be derived from the event. So

OG. hoffen. Das thier hofft, verhofft, i. e. stands waiting.—Schwenck.
To Hopple. See Hamper.
Horde. A Turkish word signifying tribe.
Horizon. Gr. ὁρίζω, bound or limit, from ὅρος, a boundary.
Horn. Goth. haurn, Lat. cornu, Bret. corn, Gr. κέρας, Heb. keren.
Hornet. G. horniss. From the buzz-ing noise. W. chwyrnu, to hum, whizz, snore ; chwyrnores, a hornet. Du. horn-sel, horsel, hornet, gadfly ; horselen, to gad, to buzz ; hor, a plaything, consisting of a toothed disk that is made to spin with a humming noise.
Horrid.—Horrible. Lat. horreo, to shudder. Dan. dial. hurre, to shiver.
Horse. ON. hross, G. ross, horse ; N. hors, a mare. Sanscr. hresh, to neigh.
Horse-radish. Pl.D. mar-reddik, from the ancient mar, a horse, from some notion of the plant being wholesome for horses.
Horse-courser. Also written horse-scourser, a horse-dealer, from OFr. coura-tier, couracier, a broker. As one of these forms was contracted in modern Fr. into courtier, the other passed in E. into courser. Couratier, mediateur ; —de chevaux, maquignon, courtier, marchand.—Roquef. Maquignon, a huckster, broker, horse-courser.—Cot. Courser of horses ; courtier de chevaux.—Palsgr.
From the Fr. noun we had formerly to course, to deal as a broker.
This catel gat he mit okering (usury), And led all his lif in corsing. Metrical Homilies of 14th century.
The word was then corrupted to scourse, or scoss, explained, to change—B. ; to change, truck, barter. ' Horse-scourser, maquignon.—Sherwood. For the origin of Fr. courtier, see Broker.
Horticulture. Lat. hortus, a garden, and colo, cultum, to till, dress.
Hose. A stocking, covering for the legs. Fr. housse, houseau ; It. uosa, Bret. heuz, euz, G. hosen, ON. hosa. Du. hose, boots, leathern casings. If a covering for the leg be the original meaning of the word, it would find a satisfactory explana-tion in Gael. cas, cos, the foot or leg ; cois-eidiadh (literally leg-clothing), shoes and stockings. The Gael. initial c often corresponds to E. h, as cuip, a whip ; cuileann, hollin or holly. But it is more likely that the original meaning is the sheath, husk, pod of pulse, grain, &c. Bav. hosen, pod, husk ; Dan. hase, the beard or husk of nuts. ' Follicoli, the hull, husk, hose, peel or thin skin that en-closeth any wheat or rye when it is green.'—Fl. Dan. dial. haas, haser, the beard of corn ; fas, Sw. fnas, the beard of nuts; OHG. fesa, ptisana, siliqua. W. hòs, hosan, hose, stocking ; yd yn ei hosan, corn in its cover, before the ears burst out.
Hospice.—Hospital. Lat. hospitium, a lodging for strangers ; hospitalis, con-nected with guests, from hospes, -pitis, landlord, entertainer, host, and conversely the person entertained, guest. Russ. Gospody, the Lord God ; gospodin, the master of the house, lord, gentleman ; Boh. hospod, lord ; hospodar, host, master of the house, landlord ; hospoda, inn, hospice.
Host. I. Fr. hostie, the consecrated wafer in the sacrament ; Lat. hostia, a sacrificial victim.
2. A landlord. It. ospite, Fr. hospie, hoste, hôte from Lat. hospes, hospit'. See Hospice.
3. An army. In the troubled times following the breaking up of the Roman Empire the first duty of the subject was to follow his lord into the field when re-quired. The summons to the perform-ance of this duty was expressed by the terms bannire in hostem, to order out against the enemy, or to order out on military service. ' Quicunque liber homo in hostem bannitus fuerit et venire con-tempserit plenum heribannum componat,' i. e. as it is explained, let him pay a fine of sixty shillings.—Edict of Charlemagne in Muratori, Diss. 26. The term hostis then, which primarily signified the enemy against whom the expedition was to be made, was compendiously used for the military service itself, and is frequently taken as synonymous with hostilis ex-peditio, or exercitalis expeditio, being then used as a feminine noun. A supplication is addressed to Charlemagne, ' ne epis-copi deinceps sicut hactenus vexentur hostibus' (i. e. with demands of military service), ' sed quando nos in hostem per-gimus' (which may be translated either, when we march against the enemy, or when we proceed on military duty or join the ranks), 'ipsi propriis resideant in parochiis.' The same immunity is ex-pressed in a charter of A. D. 965, ' nec ab hominibus ipsius ecclesiæ hostilis ex-peditio requiratur.' In a law of Lothaire a certain fine is imposed on those who, having the means, neglect ' hostem bene facere,' while those are excused who ' propter paupertatem neque per se hos-tem facere, neque adjutorium præstare possint.' It. bandire hoste, to proclaim war.—Fl. The expression would easily pass from military service to the army on duty, and thence to any numerous assemblage.
Hostage. No doubt Vossius' deriva- tion is correct, from obses, obsid', a surety, pledge, hostage; obsidatus, hostage-ship, whence obsidaticus, ostaticus, as shown by It. statico, stadico, hostage. Mid.Lat. Obstagia, ein leystunge, birgschafft; ob- stagium, gisselunge, giselschafft; obsta- gius, vel obses, gissel (G. geisel, a hostage), eyn frides pfant.—Dief. Sup.
Hostel.—Hotel. Fr. hostel, hôtel, a lodging, inn, house, residence. Hostler, properly the keeper of an inn, but now applied to the servant at an inn who looks after the horses. From Lat. hos- pit', guest, hospitium, hospitaculum, a lodging-house, inn, place where strangers are entertained. In Mid.Lat. hospitale was used in the same sense, whence hos- pital, hostel, hotel. See Hospice.
Hostile. Lat. hostilis; hostis, an enemy, foe.
Hot. See Heat.
Hottentot. Schouten, who visited the Cape in 1653, a year after the settlement of that colony by the Dutch, says that ' the natives were called by us and other Europeans Hottentots, by reason of their clucking speech.' ' Some words,' says Dapper, ' they cannot utter except with great trouble, and seem to draw them up from the bottom of the throat like a tur- key-cock. Wherefore our countrymen in respect of this defect and extraordi- nary stammering in language have given them the name of Hottentots, as that word is ordinarily used in this sense as a term of derision to one who stutters and stammers in the use of his words.' This passage may perhaps only show the very early period at which the term Hottentot was applied by the Dutch to a man of uncouth speech, un homme d'un langage extremement obscur ou désagréable.— Halma.
In all discourse they cluck like a broody hen, seeming to cackle at every other word, so that their mouths are almost like a rattle or a clapper, smacking and making a great noise with their tongues.—Dapper's Africa by Ogilvy, p. 595.
It was this clicking or stuttering which seems to have been represented by the syllables hot-en-tot, hot and tot, when the name in question was given to the natives whose uncouth speech excited so much attention. That such syllables are well adapted to represent the sounds is ap- parent from Dohne's description of the dental click of the Caffres, in which ' the tip of the tongue is drawn in a pressing or sucking manner against the upper front teeth and gums, and quickly struck away, so as to make a slight noise or smack.' The same representative forms give rise to Yorksh. hutter (Whitby GL), Du. hateren (Hexham, 1647), tateren (Bomhoff), G. tottern (Ludwig), to stam- mer, stutter; Ptg. totaro, stammering. See Philolog. Trans. 1866.
Hough. See Hock.
Hound. G. hund, Gr. κύων, κυνός, a dog. Perhaps from his howling voice. OHG. hunon, gannire ut vulpes.—Dief. Sup. Esthon. hunt, hundi, a wolf, from hundama, to howl. Sc. hune, to whine as children.
Hour. Lat. hora.
House. Goth. hus, G. haus, Magy. ház, Lat. casa.
Housel. ON. hunsl, husl, the sacra- ment, properly the sacrifice, as Fr. hostie, Lat. hostia, the host or consecrated wafer, properly the victim sacrificed. Goth. hunsl, sacrifice, hunsljan, to offer sacri- fice; unhunslags, unpropitiable, ἀσπονδος, 2 Tim. iii. 3.
* Housings. Fr. housse, a short man- tle of coarse cloth worn in ill weather by countrywomen about their head and shoulders; a footcloth for a horse, a coverlet for a bed (in which sense it is mostly used in spitles for lepers).—Cot. A horsecloth, saddle-cloth, cover of chairs, of carriages, hammer-cloth.—Spiers. The housse of a draught-horse is explained by Halma as a sheep or goatskin hung to the neckstrap (collar?). The original meaning of the word seems to be a tuft or bunch of fibrous matter, a rug or shaggy covering. It may be the original of which E. hassock, a tuft of coarse grass, is the dim. Fr. houssu, rugged with hair; crins houssus, thick locks or tufts of hair; mouton houssu, a sheep well woolled; houssure de laine, a fleece or great lock of wool; housser, to sweep or dust with a besom or brush. The word in Lang. is ourzo, in Prov. houssa.
To Hove. Sc. hove, how, hufe, huff, is explained by Jam. to swell, to halt, to tarry, stay, lodge, remain. The proper meaning of the word is to huff or blow, and thence, on the one hand, to puff up or swell, and on the other to take breath, to rest, repose. ' Mr J. Hay says that the whole body is hoved and swelled like a loaf.'

Morcar. erl of Gloucestre myd ys ost by syde In ane valleye hovcde the endyne vor to abyde.

To pant and take breath is a natural figure from which to express the idea of resting from labour, then resting, ceasing, waiting. So N. pusta, to breathe, to rest a little; pust, a short rest.

Hovel. A shed open at the sides sup-ported on posts. It is used by W. of Worcester for a canopy over the head of a statue, according to Hal., in which sense it would exactly correspond to Mid.Lat. capella (see Chapel), and may be ex-plained from Du. huif, huive, a hood, the tilt of a waggon. In like manner E. hut is related to OG. hot, W. hotan, hotyn, a cap, a hood. On the other hand, the word may be related with OFr. hobe, a coop or hutch, Fr. Fland. hobette, Champ. hobe, hobette, huge, hugette, a cabin, hut. W. hogl, hogldy, a hovel, may be bor-rowed.

To Hover. Properly, of a hawk, to keep itself stationary in the air by a quiv-ering movement of the wings. Du. hugg-heren, huyveren, kuyveren, to quiver, shiver.—Kil. Bailey has to hover, to shiver for cold. It is probably from the figure of shivering that the word is used in the sense of standing in expectation. 'The landlord will no longer covenant with him, for that he daily looketh after change, and hovereth in expectation of new worlds.'—Spenser in Todd. Du. huiverigheid, shivering; fig. irresolution, hesitation.—Bomhoff.

How. AS. hu, hwa, G. wie, Du. hoe, Dan. hvor. It seems the particle which forms an element of the relative pronoun who, what, and should mean mode, form, specific appearance.

To Howl. Lat. ululare, Fr. huller, hurler, G. heulen, Du. huylen, Gr. ὀλολύζειν, to cry out.

Howlet. An Owl.

Hoy. Du. huy, Fr. heu, a kind of vessel used in Brabant either for tracking or sailing.

Hubbub. Outcry, disturbance. A re-petition of hoop! representing a cry.

Huckle-backed.—Huck-shouldered. See Hug.

Huckle-bone. Hug-bone, hubbon, hug-gan, the hip, hip-bone.

* Huckster.—To Huck. Du. hoecker, hucker, Pl.D. haker, choker, Bav. hugker, hugkler, hugkner. Swab. huker, hukler, a petty dealer, higler, huckster. As we argued that to higgle was from higler, so it appears that to huck or haggle in bar-gaining is from the element common to the foregoing appellations of a petty dealer. I hucke as one doth that would bye a thynge gode cheape, je harcele.—Palsgr. The name may probably have been applied in the first instance to a pedlar or one who carried his pack upon his back. G. hocken (Pl.D. in de hucke sitten), to sit in a cowering attitude, G. hocken, aufhocken, Pl.D. op de hucke nemen (up den hukbak nemen.—Brem. Wtb.) to take one on his back.—D. M. v. 248. See Hug. In the same way, from the paral-lel form Swab. hutschen, to shrug or sit cowering, we pass to Alsace hutzlen, to carry on the back, Westerwald hütschler, Nassau hitsler, one who carries about meal or corn for sale in sacks upon a horse.—Westerw. Id. In Mid.Lat. huckster was rendered auxionarius, auxiatrix, from a supposi-tion probably that the verb to huck was connected with Lat. augeo, auctum, to increase, viz. to raise the price.

Huddle. The radical image seems to be a swarm of creatures in broken move-ment, thence a confused mass. To huddle is thus to make a confused mass; to huddle on one's clothes, to throw them on in a disorderly heap; to huddle together, to press together in a crowd. Sc. to hod, to jog, to houd, hoddle, to wriggle, waddle, rock; Banff. to howd, howdle, to move up and down with a slight motion as a thing floating, to rock a child in the arms, to carry about in a clumsy manner; Sc. howder, to swarm.

Menyies o' moths an' flaes are shook, An' in the floor they howder.

Banff. huthir, to walk in a clumsy hob-bling manner, to do work in a hasty un-skilful manner. Swiss hottern, to shake; höderlen, hötterlen, to waddle, totter; hoodschen, to crawl; hudeln, to flutter, wabble; hudern, to entangle. Bav. hudeln, hudern, to do in a hasty and-careless manner. Swab. hudlen, huttlen, to hurry over, do in an imperfect man-ner; G. hudeln, Du. hoetelen, to bungle.

Hue. I. AS. heaw, hiw, form, fashion, appearance, colour; hiwian, to fashion, shape, transform, pretend; hiwung, crea-tion, pretence. Often explained from heawan, to cut, as the cut or shape of a thing. But perhaps heawan, ywan, to show, is a more likely origin, making appearance the radical meaning of the word. Bav. hau! look.

2. Fr. huer, to hoot, shout, make hue and cry. Bret. hua, huda, to cry to frighten wolves, to hoot or cry in derision; W. hwa, to halloo, to loo, to hoot.
To Huff.—Hoove. To puff or blow, analogous to E. whiffy or G. hauchen, to breathe or blow, from a representation of the sound.
And blowen here bellewys that al here brayn brestes, .
Huf! puf! seith that on, haf! paf! seith thatother. Satire on the Blacksmiths. Rel. Antiq. I. 240.
To huff up, to puff up, swell with wind. 'In many birds the diaphragm may be easily huffed up with air.'—Grew in Todd. 'Excrescences, called emphysemata, like unto bladders puffed up and hooved with wind.'—Holland's Pliny in R.
Then, as an angry person puffs and blows, a Miff, a fit of passion; to take huff, to take offence; to give one a huff, to speak like an angry man to one, to give him a rebuke. 'Fort joyeux de ce que le conte avait ainsi espouffé le dit procureur,' had given the procureur a good huff—Motley 2. 20.
To huff one at draughts is so called because the move is accompanied by blowing on the piece. Dan. blase en brikke, to blow on a piece, to huff at draughts; Pol. chuch! I huff you; chuchać, to blow.
Hug. The utterance induced by the shudder of cold is represented in different dialects by the interjections ngh! u! uk! hu! schu! shuch!—Grimm 3. 298; Wall. chouk! interjection expressive of cold.—Remacle. From this interjection is formed Du. huggeren, frigutire, to shiver.—Kil.
From the same source the E. hug signifies the bodily attitude produced by the sensation of cold when we shrug together into a heap with the back rounded and the arms pressed upon the breast. 'I hugge, I shrink in my bed. It is good sporte to see this little boy hugge in his bed for cold.'—Palsgr. The reference to cold is afterwards lost, and the word is applied to the mere pressure of anything between the arms against the breast.
Parallel forms are G. hocken, Du. hucke, Sw. huka sig, Da. sidde paa hug, to crouch, sit cowering; Du. huckschouderen, to shrug the shoulders, explaining E. huck-shouldered, crump-shouldered, huckle-backed, hump-backed.
The introduction of an r (always useful in the expression of shivering) gives Fris. hurcken, to shrug with cold—Kil.; E. hurch, to cuddle, hurkle, to shrug up the back.—Hal. To hurkle, to crouch, draw the body together; hurkle-backit, as E. huckle-backed, crump-backed.—Jam. Du. hurken, as well as hucken, to crouch—Kil.; ON. (with transposition of the r), hruka, crouching, shrugging; at sitia i eirne hruku, as NE. to ruck, to squat on the hams.
On the same principle that the foregoing are derived from the interjectional forms ugh! uk! the Bav. hutsch! interj. of cold, gives rise to Swab. hutscheln, hautscheln, to shiver with cold; hutsch, shivery, and hutschen, E. dial, to hutch, to shrug.
Huge. The effect of cold and fear or horror on the human frame being nearly the same, the interjection ugh! is used as an exclamation as well of cold as of horror and disgust. Hence ug (the root of ugly, ugsome, &c.), in the sense of shudder, feel horror at; ON. ugga, to fear; Sc. to ug, OE. to houge, to feel horror at; Bret. heuge, aversion, disgust. See Ugly.
The meaning of huge then is, so great as to cause terror.
The knight himself even trembled at his fall, So huge and horrible a mass it seemed.—F. Q.
In the same way Bohem. hruza, horror, shudder, also a great number, a fearful number.
* Hugger-mugger.—Hodermoder.—Hudgemudge. Adverbial expressions applied to what is done in a concealed or clandestine manner.
And yet I pray thee leve brother Rede thys ofte, and so lete other, Huyde it not in hodymoke. Myrc. Instr. Parish Priest, p. 62.
The radical image, as in the case of cuddle, is a whispering together. Banff. hudgemudge, a side talk in a low tone, a suppressed talking: 'The two began to hudgemudge wi' ane anither in a corner.' To hudge, to rumour, to speak in secret.
G. mucken, to mutter, Swiss muckeln, muggeln, to murmur, to speak secretly of a thing; gemuggel, murmur, rumour. G. muck represents a suppressed utterance, the least sound a person makes when endeavouring to keep still, and thence mucken, to suppress an utterance, to keep still. N. mugg, secrecy; mugge, to do anything in secret. Sw. le i mjugg, to laugh in one's sleeve. A similar train of thought may be observed in Lat. mutire, mussare, mussitare (to say mut), to mutter, say anything in a low voice, to be silent, to make no noise, to keep a thing secret; Fr. musser, mucer, to hide, conceal, keep close, lurk in a corner—Cot. —' Cil que musce les furmens : qui abscondit frumenta.' — Proverbes II. 36. 'Donum absconditum extinguit iras.'—Ib. 21. 14. Banff. hushmush, a secret talking, a rumour.

In modern use hugger-mugger is rather applied to what is done in a muddling or mean and disorderly manner than to what is done in secret, a sense which may be illustrated by Banff. huschle-muschle, a state of great confusion, very often employed to indicate the confusion that may arise in money matters, or when anything is done in which many people are concerned, a muddle. Huschle, the noise made by any material (generally soft) thrown down or falling of itself. In a huschle, in a confused mass. 'The aul' fehl dyke cam doon in a huschle aboot ther lugs.' Here huschle or huschle-muschle represents a confused sound, as of a number of people or of things falling.

Huguenot. Swiss Rom. einguenot, aigueno, protestant (Bridel in v. tsassi), seem to support the most plausible of the many derivations offered, from G. eidgenossen, confederates.

* Hulk. Formerly a large merchant ship.

Having collected together about fourscore hulkes (navibus onerariis).—Golding, Cæsar in R.

Two hulkes wherein certain goods appertaining to Englishmen were taken by Frenchmen.—Cardinal Wolsey in R.

It. olca, orca, a great ship or hulk. Fr. hourque, oulque, a hulk or huge flie-boat.—Cot. The original meaning of the word is probably shown in OE. horrock, the hold, or place where the cargo was stored.

O boy that fled to one of the Flemysh shippis and hid him in the horrok.—Capgrave, 234.

The hold may have been so called from NE. hurrock, a heap or quantity, from the heap of sacks which formed the cargo, and was in ON. called bulki, bulk. ON. hruga, a heap.

On the other hand the horrock or hold may have been viewed as the place where the water collects. Lat. orca, urceus, Lang. dourc, dourco, a jar ; Flem. durk, urk, the bilge of a ship. N. holk, a pail, tub.

To Hull. I. To float, ride to and fro on the water.—B. Fr. houle, the waves or rolling of the sea. Du. holle or holgaande zee, a hollow or agitated sea.

2. To coax or fondle.

She hulled him and mollid him and took him about the neck.—Chaucer. Beryn.

HUMDRUM N. hulla, sulla, tralla, to lull, quiet by singing in a monotonous voice ; mulla, to mutter, speak soft and unmeaningly.

Hull. 1. The chaff of corn, cod of pease.—B. G. hülle, a clothing, veil, cloke. See To Hull.

2. The body of a ship. See Hold.

Hullabaloo.—Hurly-burly. Words formed to represent a confused noise, hence signifying uproar, confusion. As a singular instance of nearly identical words devised in widely different countries to represent the same image, we may cite Turkoman qualabala'ch, clamour, row, mob, crowd.—F. Newm. Kara-balik s. s.—Hunting Grounds of Old World. Illyr. halabuka, uproar, noise. Boh. halabala, helter-skelter ; Sanscr. halahalâ, shout, tumult, noise.—Benfey.

To Hum.—Humble-bee. G. hummen, summen, Du. hommelen, Lat. bombire, bombilare, all from direct imitation, to hum or buzz as a bee. G. hummel, a drone, humble-bee ; Lat. bombus, Gr. βόμβος, a humming ; βομβύλιος, a humble-bee, bumble-bee.

To Hum. To delude. To hum and haw is to stammer and be at a loss what to say. Hence to hum one in a factitive sense is to cause him to hum and haw, to perplex him. ON. hvums, repressæ vocis sibilus, astonishment ; at hvumsa, to confound. Hann hvumsadiz við, he was so confounded he could hardly stammer out a word. On the other hand consider Ptg. zumbir, to hum, zombar, to jeer or jest.

Human.—Humane. Fr. humain, Lat. humanus, belonging or appropriate to a man, from homo.

Humble.—Humility. Lat. humilis, low, from humus, the ground.

Humbug. A modern term. Perhaps for hum and buzz, from a union of hum and buzz, which seem to be taken as signifying sound without sense.

Sir, against one o'clock prepare yourself, Till when you must be fasting ; only take Three drops of vinegar in at your nose, Two at your mouth, and one at either ear, To sharpen your five senses, and cry hum Thrice, and then buzz as often.—Alchemist.

Preserved or reserved 'tis all one to us, Sing you Te Deum, we'll sing Hum and Buzz. Heraclitus Ridens, ii. 56, in N. & Q.

Buzz, quoth the blue fly, Hum, quoth the bee, Buzz and hum they cry, And so do we. Catch, set by Dr Arne in N. & Q., June 18, 1864

Humdrum. What goes on in a hum-drum ming and drumming or droning way; monotonous, common-place.
Humid.—Humour. Lat. humidus, moist, humor, moisture.
Hump.—Hummock. Du. hamme, a lump of something eatable, a piece of land; hompe, a hunch, piece cut off something; hompe broods, a hunch of bread. OSw. hap, hump, a piece of land. The immediate origin seems the notion of a projection, a modification of form which may either be regarded as traced out by a jogging motion, or as giving a jolt to those who pass over it. It must also be borne in mind that a jolting movement is represented by the figure of a rattling sound or broken utterance. Thus we have N. glamra, skrangla, to rumble, rattle; glamren, skranglen, ronglig, uneven; Du. hobbelen, to stammer, also to jog, jolt, rock; hobbelig, rough, uneven; E. hobble, to move with an uneven gait; hob, hub, a projection. Then with the nasal intonation Pl. D. humpeln, humpumpen (Schütze), to limp; Bav. humpen, Du. hompelen, to limp or stumble; hompelig, rough, uneven; E. hump, a projection; N. hump, a knoll. The same relation holds between E. limp, to go unevenly, walk lame, and lump, a projection, excrescence, piece cut off. And see next Article.

Hunch. To hunch, to give a thrust with the elbow—B.; to shove, to gore with the horns.—Hal. The meaning of the word is thus a jog with something pointed, and thence a projection (Lat. projicere, to strike outwards); then, as the prominent part of a loaf or the like is the readiest cut off, a hunch of bread, a piece separated for the purpose of eating. In the same way we have lunch, a thump, and lunch, a lump or hunch of bread, or the like; bunch, to thrust or strike, and bunch, a knob; while each of these synonyms ending in ch have a parallel form in mp; hump and hunch, lump and lunch, bump and bunch; dump or thump (dumpling, a knob of dough or paste) and dunch.

Hundred. ON. hundrad, from hund and rad, ratio, reckoning, number. Hund-margr (margr, many), to the number of a hundred. The term raed, a reckoning (a counting up to ten), corresponds in Sw. to the G. zig or E. ly in the formation of cardinal numbers; attraed, eighty, nyraed, ninety, and sometimes the hund-raed comprised twelve raeds instead of ten. This was called the hundraed tolfraed, of twelve tens or 120, corresponding to our long hundred still occasionally used in trade reckoning. In Saxon reckoning the term hund forms an element in the designation of the decads after three-score; hund-seofontig, seventy; hund-teontig, a hundred; hund-twelftig, a hundred and twenty. The union of the AS. elements hund, tig, may pretty clearly be recognised in the Gr. κοντα, Lat. ginti, the termination of the decads below a hundred, while the same element appearing in quadringenti, quingenti, 400 and 500, connects hund with Lat. centum, W. cant. From the Goth. taihun-tihund, a hundred, it would seem that hund is a docked form of taihun, ten, which would agree with its appearance in the decads below 100. Hund-seofon-tig, ten seven times. The termination raed is explained by Ihre from the practice of reckoning on an abacus composed of several wires, where each bead has a different value according to the wire or line on which it is placed. OSw. rad, a line.

Hunger. Goth. huhrus, hunger; hugrjan, huggrjan, to hunger.
To Hunt. To pursue with hounds. See Hound.

Hurdle. Du. horde, a hurdle, fence of branches or osiers; horden-wandt, a wicker wall. G. Hürde, a frame of rods, hurdle, grate; Hürdung, a fence made with hurdles, which is probably not to be confounded with E. hoarding, a fencing of boards. Fr. hourdis, wattle-work for walls, gave rise to Mid.Lat. hurdicium, a wicker defence in sieges. Et quae reddebant tutos hurdicia muros. ON. hurd, a door, properly a wicker gate. The origin is Swiss hurd, a pole. Hence Rouchi hour, hourde, a framework of poles to keep hay from the ground in a barn; hourdache, a mason's scaffold. Perhaps the word may be identical with E. rod, by transposition of the r.

To Hurl. To make a noise—B.; to rumble as the wind—Hal.; but now only to drive through the air with a whirring noise. Sw. hurra omkring, to whirl round; Bohem. chrleti, to throw or hurl. Du. hor, E. dial. hurr, a toy composed of a toothed disk made to spin round with a humming sound; Dan. hurre, to hum or buzz; Swiss hurrli, a humming-top.

Hurlyburly. The whirring noise made by a body moving rapidly through the air is represented in G. by hrr! hurr! brr! burr! 'Hrr! weg ist's:' whizz! it's gone. The representative syllables are then variously combined to signifies bustle, noise, disturbance. G. hurliburli, hurlurliburli, with rapidity and violence (Sanders) ; Fr. hurluberlu, hurlubrelu, hurluberlu (Jaubert), in a bouncing way, abruptly. Pl.D. huller-de-buller, Sw. huller-om-buller, Du. holder-de-bolder, head over heels, confusedly, in a hurry.
Hurra! Exclamation of excitement. Bav. hr! hrr! interjectio frementis.
Hurricane. Fr. ouragan, Sp. huracan, from a native American word probably imitating the rushing of the wind. Comp. E. hurl, to rumble as the wind ; hurlwind, a whirlwind; hurleblast, a hurricane.—Hal.
To Hurry. This word had formerly a stronger meaning than that in which it is now commonly used. It is explained by Junius violenter dejicere, raptim propellere. The origin is a representation of the sound made by something rapidly whirled through the air. Thus G. husch is explained by Küttner, a term expressing quick motion accompanied by a hissing sound, and it as well as hurr! are used interjectionally in the sense of quick! make haste! Swiss hurrsch, a sound intended to express a rapid action accompanied by a whizzing sound, whence interjectionally, hurrsch! out with you! OHG. hursc, quick; hurscjan, arhurscjan, to hasten. Kehursche dina chumft, hasten thy coming.—Notker. G. hurtig, quick, brisk. The Teutonista gives huri! as a cry to urge on horses. 'Huri est interjectio festinantis quod loquitur auriga equis quando pellit currum vel redum vel hujusmodi.'—Jun. The equivalent cry in France and Italy is arri! harri! (a cart-erly voice of exciting—Cot.), whence Sp. arriero, a driver of mules. Arri! arri! ça, ça, debout, debout, cry to excite to work.—Dict. Castr. Harrer! quicker! an exclamation to a horse in Townley Mysteries.—Hal.
Hurst. Du. hurst, a brake, bushy place ; Swiss hurst, a shrub, thicket ; G. horst, a tuft or cluster, as of grass, corn, reeds, a clump of trees, heap of sand, crowd of people.
To Hurt.—Hurtle. Du. horten, Fr. heurter. It. urtare, to dash against. W. hwrdd, a stroke, blow, brush, onset, hyrddio, to drive, thrust, butt, irritate. To hurtle, to clash or dash together, is the frequentative form of the same root.
And whenever he taketh him he hurtlith him down.—Wiclif, Mark 9.
The noise of battle hurtleth in the air. Julius Cæsar.

Belongs to the same imitative class as hurl, hurly-burly, &c. N. hurra, to rattle.
Husband. From ON. bua (the equivalent of G. bauen, Du. bouwen), to till, cultivate, prepare, are bu, a household, farm, cattle ; buandi, bondi, N. bonde, the possessor of a farm, husbandman ; húsbond or husband, the master of the house. Probably Lap. banda, master, káte-banda (káte, house), master of the house, with the derivative bandas, rich, may be borrowed from the Scandinavian.
Hush. See Hist.
Husk. Du. hulse, hulsche, husk, chaff, covering of seeds, huysken, case in which anything is kept, also as hulse, the pod, chaff, or seed-vessel.—Kil. The Walach., which changes k for p, has hospă, husk, chaff, pod.
Hussar. Magy. huszar, a light horseman, skirmisher, soldier adapted to harass the enemy. From Swiss hussj Magy. usz! uszu! cries used in setting on a dog, are formed Du. hussen, huschen, Magy. uszitani, huszitani, to incite, set on to attack ; N. hussa, to chase with noise and outcry. See Harass, To Hurry.
Hussy. Corrupted from huswife.
Hustings. The municipal court of the city of London, where probably the elections were first conducted, and hence the name may have been transferred to the polling-booths at an election. ON. thing, Dan. ting, court of justice, assembly. The husting was the house or domestic court.
To Hustle. To shake or push about. Hustle-cap, a game in which halfpence are shaken about in a cap and then thrown into the air. Du. hutsen, hutselen, to shake to and fro ; N. huska, huste, to rock, swing. Fr. houspiller, to pull about, tug each other like fighting dogs ; Champ. hoitrdebiller, to shake, hourballer, to ill use.
Hut. W. hotan, hotyn, a cap, hood, OG. hot, a cap. 'Digitabulum, finger-huot, -hot, -hut.'—Dief. Sup. OSax. hutte, care, protection.—Kil. Du. hut, hutte, hut, cabin.
Hutch. Fr. huche, a chest or bin ; Champ. huge, hugette, a coffer, shop, hut, cabin. Du. hok, a pen, cote for animals ; konijnen-hok, a rabbit-hutch ; N. hokk, a small apartment, bedchamber.
Hybrid. Lat. hybrida, a mongrel, animal born of heterogeneous parents, explained from Gr. ὕβρις, outrage, viz. an outrage on the laws of nature.
Hydr-. Gr. ὕδωρ, -ατος (in comp. ὑδρο-), water. Hence hydraula (αὐλός, a pipe), an organ sounded by water, then transferred to a machine driven by water; hydraulics, the science of fluids in action.
Hydrogen, what generates water; hydro-phobia (φόβος, fear), the disease charac-terised by dread of water, &c.
Hydra. Gr. ὕδρα, a water-serpent; a fabulous monster so named.
Hyena. Gr. ὕαινα (from ὗς, a sow, swine), literally, a swine-like creature; from the rigid hair along the back.
Hygrometer. Gr. ὑγρός, damp, humid, and μέτρον, a measure.
Hymen. Gr. Ὑμήν, a name of the deity of marriage, a nuptial song.
Hymn. Gr. ὕμνος, a song, a poem to the honour of God.
Hyper.—Hyperbole. Gr. ὑπέρ, above or beyond ; ὑπερβάλλω (βάλλω, to cast or throw), to overshoot, exceed ; whence excessive praise.
Hyphen. Lat. hyphen, from Gr. ὑφέν (ὑπό, under one), together.
Hypo-. Gr. ὑπό, Lat. sub, under.
Hypochondriac. Gr. χόνδρος, a car-tilage ; τὰ ὑποχόνδρια, the soft part of the body under the cartilage of the breast, the supposed seat of the disorder.
Hypocrisy. Gr. ὑποκρίνομαι, to answer, to speak in dialogue, play a part upon the stage, met. to play a part, dissemble, pretend ; ὑπόκρισις, -σις, playing a part, hypocrisy, outward show.
Hypothesis. Gr. ὑπόθεσις (ὑπό, under, and τίθημι, to set, place), a placing or setting under, something set under, a foundation, a supposition or assumption.
Hysteric. Gr. ὑστερικός, pertaining to affections of the (ὑστέρα) uterus.

I. G. ich, ON. eg, Lat. ego, G. ἐγώ, Sanscr. aham.
Ice. ON. ís, G. eis, Du. ijs. The Pl.D. aisen, Du. ijsen, to shudder, which have been indicated as the origin of our word, are probably themselves derivatives, in accordance with Fr. se glacer d'horreur, d'épouvante. Magy. jeg. Lap. jágna, Fin. jää, Gael. eigh, eidhre, eighre, W. ia, ice ; Bret. ien, cold.
Icicle. AS. íses gicel, Pl.D. ishekel, Du. ijskekel, iskegel, N. isjukel, isjokul, Da. dial. isegel, icicle. ON. jökull, piece of ice, field of ice, jaki, piece or mass of ice. Hann er stöðugr eins og jaki, he stands as steady as a block of ice. Sup-posed by Aufrecht to be of the same stock with Olr. aig, Gael. eigh, W. iâ (for iag), ice.
Idea.—Ideal. Gr. ἰδέα, look, appear-ance, of a thing, its fancied form.
Identical. From Lat. idem, the same, whence Fr. identité, identifier, identique.
Idiom. Gr. ἰδίωμα, a peculiarity of, or mode of expression peculiar to, any given language, from ἴδιος, private, personal, peculiar to one in particular.
Idiot. From Gr. ἴδιος, one's own, pri-vate, ἰδιώτης, a private person, one who has no professional knowledge, unprac-tised, unskilled in anything. Mod.Gr. ἰδιώτης τούτου τοῦ ἔργου, unacquainted with this work ; ἰδιῶται κατὰ τὸν πόνον, persons unaccustomed to labour ; ἰδιώτης τῷ λόγῳ, rude in speech.
Inscius et brutus, simplex, idiotaque, follus, Indoctus vel insipidus conjungitur istis. John de Garlandiâ de synonymis.
The word was used in the 16th century in a weaker meaning than at present. Idiot, neither fool ne right wise ; half innocent.—Fr. Pm.
Idle. Empty, vain, unemployed. G. eitel, Du. ijdel. ijdel van hoofde, mad ; ijdelen haerinck, a shotten or empty her-ring.—Kil. Jedel (of texture), loose, not tight, pierced with many small holes ; jedele plaats, an empty place.—Halma.
ON. auðr, empty, vacant ; G. öde, waste, void, desert ; Fr. vuide, voide, empty, waste, wide, hollow.—Cot.
Idol.—Idolatrous. Gr. εἴδωλον, a likeness, representation, of a god, namely, an image.
Idyll. Lat. idyllium, from Gr. εἰδύλ-λιον, a brief poem.
If. Goth. iba, num, whether? jabai, if ; OHG. ibu, ubaoba, ob, if, whether ; hence condition, doubt ; ano ibu, without doubt, without condition, as OFr. sans nul si. Du. of, oft, if, whether, or ; G. ob, whether. ON. ef, if; efa, ifa, to doubt; OSw. jefwa, to doubt, suspect.
Igneous.—Ignite. Lat. ignis, fire.
Ignoble.—Ignominy.—Ignorant. From the root of Lat. gnosco, to know, are formed gnarus, knowing, skilful, nobilis (for gnobilis), illustrious, widely-known, nomen (for gnomen), name, fame. Hence with the privative in-, ignarus, unknowing or unknown; ignoro, not to know; ignobilis, of no reputation; ignominia, discredit, ill-fame.

Ilk. The same. See Such.
Ill. Goth. ubils, G. übel, evil. ON. illr, evil, bad.
Image.—Imagine. Lat. imago, -inis, a resemblance or representation of a thing. According to Festus from imitor, to imitate.
Imbecile. Lat. imbecillis, feeble; explained as if it signified one without a (baculus) staff. But the sense is rather one who leans upon a staff.
To Imbrue. It. bevere, to drink, beverare, to give or to cause to drink. On the same principle Fr. beuvre (Pat. de Berri), to drink, would form beuvrer, to cause to drink, whence (by the same inversion as found in Fr. breuvage, bruvage, from beverage) embreuver, to moisten, soak in, soften with liquor; s'embruer, to imbrue or bedabble himself with.—Cot.
To Imbue. Lat. imbuo, to moisten or soak. Bua was a nursery word for drink.
Imitate. Lat. imitor, imitatus.
Immaculate. Unstained. Lat. macula, a spot or stain.
Immense. Lat. metior, mensus, to measure; immensus, unmeasured, beyond measure. See Measure.
To Immolate. Lat. mola, meal with salt sprinkled upon the sacrifice; immolo, -as (so to dress the victim), to offer, to sacrifice.
Imp. A scion, shoot, graft, figuratively offspring, a child, but now only applied in a bad sense, a child of Hell.
The origin is Du. pote, Dan. pode, Pl.D. paot, a shoot, slip; whence Pl.D. paten, inpaten, Du. pooten, inpooten, to plant, to set; Dan. pode, Limousin empeouta, Bret. embouda, OHG. impiton, impten, AS. impan, G. impfen, to graft; in the Salic laws impotus, Limousin empeou, a graft. The total squeezing out of the long vowel is remarkable. The Du. pote is related to E. put, as Du. botte, Fr. bouton, a bud, to Du. botten, Fr. bouter, to put forth as a tree in the spring.—Cot.
To Impair. Lat. pejor, Fr. pis, pire, worse; empirer, to make worse, impair.
To Impeach. Prov. empachar, empaitar, to embarrass, hinder; empaig, hindrance. It. impacciare, OFr. empescher, to encumber, trouble, hinder. Poitrine empeschée, obstructed chest; empescher le fief, to take legal possession of the fief. To impeach one of treason is to fasten a charge of treason upon him. Now the notion of encumbering, clogging, or impeding is very generally taken from the figure of entangling with a sticky material. Sc. claggy, unctuous, miry; to dag, to daub with clay, to clog; and clag is used in a forensic sense for encumbrance, burden on property, or for impeachment on character. In the same way G. kummer (the equivalent of E. cumber, encumber), sometimes used for the dirt in the streets, signifies arrest, seizure, attachment of goods. To pester, to embarrass, trouble, encumber, is the Fr. empaistrir, to entangle in paste or glutinous material.
In like manner the root of It. impacciare may be G. patsche, puddle, mud, from patschen, to paddle. Einen in der patsche stecken lassen, to leave one sticking in the mud, leave him in the lurch. It. impacciuccare, to bedaub.—Fl. It may however be from Gael. bac, stop, hindrance, as indicated under Dispatch.
Imperial.—Imperative. Lat. imperium, command, dominion, empire.
Implement. What is employed or applied in the exercise of a trade. Fr. employer, emplier, to employ.
To Imply. Lat. implicare, Fr. impliquer, to enfold, enwrap, involve.
Import. Sense or meaning.—B. See Purport.
To Importune.—Importunate. Lat. importunus, unseasonable, inconvenient, troublesome, seems to be formed as the opposite to opportunus. Hence to importune, to be troublesome to. See Opportunus.
Imposthume. A corruption of Fr. apostume, apostime, from Gr. ἀπόστημα (literally, what separates or stands apart), an abscess.
Impregnable. What cannot be taken. OFr. pregner, Lat. prehendere, to take.
Imprest. Money given out for a certain purpose to be afterwards accounted for. 'There remaineth in sundrie provisions—as well with certein money delivered imprest for the provision of the household, who have not yet accounted for the same.' 'In provision £—. In prest £— viz. in the hands of, &c.'

Household account of Princess Elizabeth, Camden Miscell. vol. ii. In prest, in ready money.

Impudent. Lat. impudens, shame-less ; pudeo, to be ashamed ; pudor, shame. As shame is the painful emotion produced by the reprobation of those to whom we look with respect, or of our own better self, it is probable that the word is derived from the interjection of reprobation, Pu ! Phu ! Fu ! Fi ! ori-ginally expressing disgust at a bad smell ; Phu ! in malam crucem.—Plaut. Pudet me, it shames me, they cry pu ! upon me. See Putrid.

In-. Ig-. Il-. Im-. Ir-. Lat. in, Gr. ἐν, in, on. In comp. it usually corre-sponds to Gr. ἀν-, E. un-, as in incon-stant, inaccurate. Before words begin-ning with a labial the n is changed to m, as in impenitent, imbrue, immense. Before g, l, and r, the n is assimilated with the following consonant, although, as in the first of these cases the g is not doubled, the n seems to be simply lost. Thus we have Lat. ignarus for in-gnarus, ignobilis for in-gnobilis. Illegal, what is contrary to law ; irrepressible, what cannot be repressed.

Incendiary. Lat. incendium, a burn-ing, from incendo, to kindle ; candeo, to glow, to be on fire.

Incense. From Lat. incendo, incensum, to kindle, to set on fire, we have to incense in a met. sense, to kindle wrath. From the same source Fr. encens, E. incense, a composition of sweet gums for burning in churches.

Incentive. Lat. incino, to sing or make music to ; incentivus, that sings or sounds to, and thence (from the incite-ment of martial or dance music), that stirs up or incites to. Non tubæ solum, sed etiam Spartanæ tibiæ incentivum aliquod feruntur habuisse.—Paneg. ad Constantin.

Inch. Lat. uncia, the 12th part of a pound, as an inch is the 12th part of a foot.

Indigenous. Lat. indigena, a native, born in the country (in question). Indu, indo, and endo are given as old forms of in, corresponding to Gr. ἔνδον and ἐντός, within. Ἐνδογενής, born in the house.

Indite. OFr. endicter, from Lat. in-dico, indictus.

Infant.—Infantry. Lat. infans, a child before the age of speech, from in, negative, and for, fari, Gr. φημί, to speak. Fr. enfant, child, son. Then as Lat. puer, a boy, or E. knave, with the same fundamental signification, were used for servant. It. fante was used for an attend-ant, a man or woman servant, a knave or varlet upon the cards, a footman or sol-dier serving on foot ; fanteria, infantry, foot-soldiers.—Fl.

Inferior.—Infernal. Lat. infra, be-neath, below ; inferior, nether, lower ; infernus, nethermost, lowest.

Ingle. Fire. Gael. aingeal, fire, light, sunshine.

Ingot. Originally the mould in which the metal was cast, and not the bar itself. The alchemist in the canon yeoman's tale gets a piece of chalk and cuts it into the shape of an ingot which will hold an ounce of metal. He put this once of copper in the crosslet, And on the fire aswithe he hath it set— And afterward in the ingot he it cast. G. einguss, the pouring in, that which is infused, a melting vessel, ingot mould, crucible.—Küttn. From eingiessen, Du. ingieten, to pour in, cast in.

Inguinal. Lat. inguen, the groin.

Ink. Gr. ἔγκαυστον, Lat. encaustum, the vermilion used in the signature of the emperor. Hence It. inchiostro, incostro, Fr. encre, enque. Wall. eng, enche, Du. inkt.

Inkle. Tape, linen thread. Fr. li-gneul, lignol, strong thread used by shoe-makers and saddlers ; lignivol (corre-sponding apparently to It. ligniuolo), shoemaker's thread.—Roquef. From the first of these forms are E. lingel, lingle, lingan. Nor hinds wi' elson and hemp lingle. Sit soling shoon out o'er the ingle. Ramsay in Jam. The second form lignivol may probably explain OE. liniolf. Lynyolf or inniolf, threde to sow with schone or botys, in-dula, licinium.—Pr. Pm. The loss of the initial l, of which we have here an ex-ample, would convert lingle into ingle or inkle. From Lat. linum, flax, Fr. ligne, Sc. ling, a line ; Fr. linge, linen, cloth of flax ; Sc. linget-seed, flax-seed.

Inkling. See Hint.

Inn. ON. inni, within ; inni, a house, the lair of a wild-beast ; inni-bod, a feast at home. Sc. in, inn, lodging, dwelling. The Bruys went till his innys swyth (to his lodgings).—Barbour.

To Inn. To bring in, carry home. ‘ I inne, I put into the berne.’—Palsgr.

Inquest. Lat. inquirere, Fr. enquerre, to inquire ; enqueste, an inquiry.

Instigate. Lat. instigo, to incite, prick forward ; Gr. στίζω, to prick ; στιγμή, a prick, point ; στιγμός, a pricking.
Insular. Lat. insula, an island.
Integer.—Integral.—Integrity. Lat. integer, entire, properly untouched, from in and tago, tango, to touch.
Inter-. Lat. inter, between, among ; as in Intercede, Interject, Interlude.
Interior.—Internal. Lat. intra, with-in ; interior, further in ; internus, inner-most.
Interloper. Du. enterloper, a contra-band trader, one who runs in between those legitimately employed. Du. loopen, to run.
Intoxicate. Lat. toxicum, Gr. τοξικόν, poison, said to be from τόξον, a bow with the arrows belonging to it, from the latter being smeared with poison.
Intrigue.—Intricate. It. intrico, in-trigo, intrinco, any intricateness, en-tangling trouble, or incumbrance.—Fl. Lat. intrico, to entangle ; extrico, to dis-entangle, extricate. Tricæ, impediment, trifles.
To Inveigle. To allure, entice or deceive by fair words.—B. From It. invogliare, to make one willing, longing, or desirous.—Fl. ' She gave them gifts and great rewards to inveigle them to her will.'—Indictment of Ann Boleyn in Froude. It is probably from a false no-tion of the etymology that we find it spelt aveugle. ' The marquis of Dorset was—so seduced and aveugled by the Lord Admiral that, &c.'—Sharington's con-fession, A.D. 1547, in Froude, v. 132.
Invidious. Lat. invidia, envy.
Invite. Lat. invito.
Invoice. A bill of particulars sent with goods. The word could never have been formed from Fr. envoi, the envoy or concluding address with which a publica-tion was formerly sent into the world. As most of our mercantile terms are from It., we may with confidence trace the derivation to It. avviso, notice, in-formation, by the insertion of an n, as in Fr. attiser, E. entice. The invoice is in fact a letter of advice (It. lettera d'av-viso), giving notice of the despatch of goods with particulars of their price and quantity.
Iodine. Gr. ἰώδης, of a violet tinge or colour.
Ire. Lat. ira, OFr. ire, iror, anger; iré, irié, irieus, irous, angry; AS. irre, anger, yrsian, to be angry.
The origin is in all probability a repre-sentation of the snarling sounds of quar-relling dogs, which exhibit a lively ex-pression of angry passion, and are also imitated by man in the cries used to rouse the passions of the animal and excite him to attack. Thus from the same root are developed forms signifying snarl, anger, incite, set on. From the continued sound of the letter r, the littera hirriens, are formed Lat. hirrire, W. hyr-rio, E. harr, to snarl ; Fin. árt, snarling like a dog, angry; árista, to snarl, to rage, irá fremere ; árryttáa, to set on, irritate, make angry. The cry used to incite a dog is represented in W. by the interjection herr! hyrr!—Richards, agreeing with N. hirra, to incite, and (without the initial h as in Lat. ira) Dan. irre, opirre, to tease, to provoke, incite ; G. veriren, verirren, exasperare.—Dief. Supp.
See Irritate.
Iris.—Iridescent. Gr. ἶρις, the rain-bow.
To Irk.—Irksome. AS. earg, slothful, dull, timid ; ON. argr, recusans, reformi-dans.'—Andersen. AS. eargian, torpes-cere præ timore, Sc. ergh, to feel reluctant, to refrain from for timidity.
Dear Jenny, I wad speak t'ye wad ye let, And yet I ergh, ye're ay sae scornfu' set.
Ramsay in Jam.
To irk is to make one ergh, to dull one's inclination to action, to tire or become weary.
My spouse Creusa remanit or we came hidder, Or by some fate of God's was reft away, Or gif sche errit or irkit by the way.—D. V.
—Erravitne viâ, seu lassa resedit.
Iron. Goth. eisarn, Du. iser, isern, G. eisen, W. haiarn, Gael. iarun.
Irony. Lat. ironia, from Gr. εἰρωνεία, an assumed appearance, pretence ; εἴρων, one who speaks with a sense other than the words convey, a dissembler.
To Irritate. Lat. irritare, to incite, stir up, provoke. A compound of in and a simple ritare, and not a frequentative of the root irr seen in Dan. opirre, G. verirren, N. hirra, Fin. árryttáa, to pro-voke, mentioned under Ire.
The snarling sounds of fighting dogs are imitated by different combinations of the letters r, s, t ; rr ! ss ! st ! ts ! tr ! rt ! giving rise to so many forms of the verb signifying to set on, to attack, or quarrel, on the principle explained under the head above-mentioned. Thus, from the imitation by a simple r, are formed Lat. hirrire, to snarl, N. hirra, to incite, Lat. ira, wrath ; from the sound of s, Pl.D. hissa, Du. hissen, hisschen, hus-schen, to set on ; from st, Bohem. stwati, Gael. stuig, to set on, and perhaps Gr.

ὀργύος, hatred; from τς, It. izz! uzz! cries to set on a dog—Muratori, izzare, adizzare, Sw. hitsa, G. hetzen, to set on, It. izza, anger; and, with the vowel inserted between the consonants, Fr. tiser, E. tice, entice, Sw. tussa, to incite, provoke; from tr, E. to ter or tar, G. zerren, to provoke to anger; and from rt, G. reitzen, Du. ritsen, Sw. reta, Lat. irritare, to provoke, incense. To the same root may be referred Gr. ῥῖψις, -ιδος, Lat. rixa (for ritsa), strife, Gr. ἐρεθίζω, to provoke.
Isinglass. G. hausenblase, the bladder of the (hausen) sturgeon, as well as the preparation made from it, by us corruptly called isinglass, probably from connecting the name with the employment of the substance in icing or making jellies.
Island.—Isle.—Isolate. The spelling of island has been corrupted, and the etymology obscured, by the influence of isle, a word from a totally different root, viz. Lat. insula, It. isola, Fr. isle; while island, AS. igland, is properly eye-land, a spot of land in the midst of water, as the eye in the midst of the face. Fris. ooge, eye, and also island, as in Schiermonnikooge, the white monk's isle, Spikeroge, Wangeroge, islands on the coast of Friesland. AS. ig has the same sense in Sceapige, Sheppey or Sheep's Island. Dan. öie, eye, ö or öe, isle. The true etymology is preserved in eyot, ait, a small island in a river.

Iso-. Gr. ἴσος, equal, as in isothermal, of equal heat; isochronous, of equal time, &c.
Issue. Fr. issu, sprung, proceeded from, born of, from issir, to go out, to flow forth, and that from Lat. exire, to go out.
-it. Lat. eo, itum, to go; whence exitus, an exit or going out, transitus, a transit or going through.
It. Du. het, it; ON. hinn, hin, hitt, ille, illa, illud.
Itch. Ichyn or ykyn or gykyn, prurio.—Pr. Pm. G. jucken, to itch. The designation is taken from the twitching movements to which itching irresistibly impels us. Swab. jucken, to hop or spring; Bav. gigkeln, to shiver, or twitch under the influence of tickling, desire, anger. Das herz gieglet ihm; cor ei subsultat. Einige gigeln so gewaltig nach dem heuraten; — itch so for marriage. Ergigkern, to cause to tremble, to frighten. Gigken, gigkezen, to utter broken sounds, to stutter, giggle.—Schmeller. Then from broken sounds the signification passed on to abrupt movements.
Iterate. Lat. iterum, again, a second time.
Itinerant. Lat. itinerari, to take a journey, from iter, itineris, a journey, route.
Ivory. Fr. ivoire, Lat. ebur.
Ivy. AS. ifig, G. epheu, OHG. ebeheie, W. eiddew, Gael. eidhean.

To Jabber.—Javer. The sound of noisy, indistinct, unmeaning utterance is represented by the simplest combinations of gutturals and labials, babble, gaggle, gabble, Sc. gabber; and with the initial g softened to j, E. jabber, gibber, javer, Fr. jaboter, to mutter, chatter, tattle. Jangelyn or javeryn, garrulo, blatero, garrio—Pr. Pm.; javver, idle silly talk; javvle, to contend, wrangle—Hal.; Fr. javioler, to gabble, prate, or prattle.—Cot.
-jacent. Lat. jaceo, to lie.
Jack, 1. The Jewish Jacobus was corrupted through Jaquemes, to Jaques in France, and James in England; and Jaques, being the commonest Christian name in the former country, was used as a contemptuous expression for a common man. Jaques, niais, sot, grossier.—Roquef. Jaquerie, an insurrection of the peasants. The introduction of the word in the same sense into England seems to have led to the use of Jack as the familiar synonym of John, which happened to be here the commonest name, as Jaques in France.
Since every Jack became a gentleman, There's many a gentle person made a Jack.
Rich. III.
The term was then applied to any mechanical contrivance for replacing the personal service of an attendant, or to an implement subjected to rough and familiar usage. Jack of the clock, Fr. jacquelet, a mechanical figure which struck the hours on a clock. A roasting-jack is a contrivance for turning a spit by means of a heavy weight, and so superseding the service of the old turnspit. A jack, a screw for raising heavy weights. A boot-jack (G. stiefel-knecht, literally boot-boy), an implement for taking off boots. Rouchi gros-jacque, a large sou.—Hécart. A jack-towel, a coarse towel hanging on a roller for the use of the household ; jack-boots, heavy boots for rough service ; black-jack, a leathern jug for household service ; jack-plane, a large plane for heavy work.

Jack. 2. Jacket. The E. jack, Fr. jaque, It. giacco (whence the dim. jacket, Fr. jaquette, a short and sleeveless country coat—Cot.), is another example of the depreciatory application of the term in the sense of substitute or servant. A jack was properly a homely substitute for a coat of mail, consisting of a padded or leather jerkin for defence, with rings or plates of iron sewed on it. Fr. jaque-mard, a wooden image against which to practise tilting, a jack of the clock, also a coat or shirt of mail.—Cot. Rouchi jacotin, a jacket, from jacot, dim. of Jacques.

Jackanapes. A coxcomb ; Jack the ape, a monkey.

Jack of Dover.
Full many a pastie hast thou lettin blode, And many a Jack of Dovyr hast thou sold That hath been twyis hot and twyis cold.
Chaucer, Prol. to Cook's Tale.

In accordance with the E. use of jack, to signify anything used as a substitute or put to homely service, Fr. jaques is a name given by pastry-cooks, implying that a piece of meat or pastry is old and hard.—Roquefort in v. Jaquet. The remaining part of the expression is probably a punning repetition of the same idea. I am informed that a heated-up dish is still among the waiters called a dover or doover, doubtless do over.

Jack-pudding. A buffoon or juggler's servant set to entertain the crowd by coarse tricks, among which eating in a ridiculous manner pudding, soup, &c., occupied a conspicuous place.

I had as lief stand among the rabble to see a jack-pudding eat a custard as trouble myself to see a play.—Shadwell in Nares.

G. hans-wurst (Jans, Jack ; wurst, pudding) ; Fr. Jean-potage, Jean-farine, a showman's buffoon.

Jade. To jade, to wear out with exertion ; jade, a worn-out horse. Sp. ijada, the flank, from Lat. ilium; ijadear, jadear, the flanks to play, to pant, palpitate ; jadeo, palpitation. Hence to jade would signify to cause to pant, or show signs of exhaustion.

Jag.—Jig.—Jog. We have had occasion, under Gog and elsewhere, to remark the way in which the roots representing in the first instance tremulous or broken sound are applied to signify quivering or reciprocating movement, or the kind of figure traced out by bodies in motion of such a nature. Now the syllables gig, gag are often used in the representation of harsh broken sounds ; Gael. gagaich, Bret. gagî, to stutter ; E. gaggle, to cry as geese ; Swab. gigacken, to gaggle as geese, bray as an ass ; Swiss gigagen, to bray ; Bav. gagkern, gagkezen, to cluck as a hen, cough harshly and abruptly, to stutter ; gigézen, gigken, to utter broken sounds, stutter, giggle ; gickgack, in nursery language, a clock, from the ticking of the pendulum (D. M. v.) ; Gael. gog, the cackling of a hen, also the nodding or tossing of the head ; E. gogmire, a quagmire, shaking mire ; Swab. gagen, gagelen, to jog, jiggle, move to and fro ; Swiss gageln, to shake, be unsteady as a table ; gagli, a giglot, a girl that can't sit still. Then, with the initial g softened to a j, E. jag or jog, an abrupt movement, a thrust brought to a sudden stop, a projection, indentation.

Some jagit uthers to the heft With knives that sheip could scheir.
The Dance. Evergreen.

The North and South Joggins are indented cliffs on opposite sides of a river in Nova Scotia, which seem to jog in and jog out in correspondence with each other.—Lyell. A joggle in masonry is a projection in a stone fitting into a hollow in the adjoining one for the purpose of bolting them together.

The prefix of an s in W. ysgogi, to shake, unites the forms having an initial g or j, with E. shag or shog, to shake or jog.—Hal. ; shaggy, jagged, rugged ; iceshoggle, a projecting point of ice ; ON. skaga, to project ; skagi, a promontory.

The thin vowel in jig, jiggle, implies a lighter movement of a similar kind to that signified by jag or jog.

Jail. See Gaol.

\* Jakes. A privy ; in Devonshire any kind of filth.—Hal. G. gauche, jauche, filthy stinking liquid ; Mistgauche, the drainings of the dunghill ; Schiffgauche, bilge water. Probably the word signifies only slops, splashing. See Jaw, 2.

Jam. The thickened juice of fruit. Mod. Gr. ζουμί, broth, juice, ζουμί τῶν πωρικών, juice of fruit.

To Jam.—To press in between something that confines the space on either side like the jambs of a door; to fix between jambs.
In a stage-coach with lumber cramm'd, Between two bulky bodies jamm'd.—Lloyd in R.
Jamb. Fr. jambe, a leg, also the jaumb or side-post of a door.—Cot. See Jambe.
To Jangle. Formerly to chatter as a bird, then to chatter, talk idly, tattle, wrangle, quarrel.
Thy mind is lorne, thou janglest as a jay. Man of Law's Tale in R.
Lang. jhangla, to cry, to yelp. OFr. jangler, to prattle, tattle, jest, flatter, lie.—Roquef. Like jingle, the representation of a clattering sound. G. zank, chiding, jangling. Du. jangelen, janken, to yelp.
Janty. Fr. gentil, pretty, agreeable.
To Japan. To varnish, because the best kind of varnished goods came to us from the country of Japan.
To Jape. The same softening of the g which is seen in jabber compared with gabble connects the OE. gab, to lie, mock, deceive, with jape. The radical meaning is chattering, idle talk. Fr. japper, to yelp, in low language is used in the sense of chatter.—Gattel. Avoir bonne jape, bien del jape, to have the gift of the gab.—Hécart. N. gjeipa, to make a wry face, twist the mouth.
Jar. Fr. jare, Sp. jarra, It. giara, from Arab. garrah, a water-pot.—Diez. But It. giara has also the same sense as Fr. gris, sand, gravel, sandstone. Giara then, like Prov. grasal, may originally be a pot-de-gris, an earthen pot. See Grail.
To Jar. To creak, make a harsh noise, as things that do not move smoothly on each other. Hence jar, disagreement, variance, quarrel. 'Christians being at jarre among themselves.'—Bale in R. Swab. garren, Bav. garrezen, to creak like a wheel or shoe, or the hinge of a door; Sp. chirriar, to creak or chirp; Lat. garrire, to chirp, to chatter.
Jargon. Properly the chattering of birds, analogous to forms like AS. cearkian, OE. chark, chirk, to creak or chirp; Lith. kirkti, to creak or cluck; karkti, to whirr, cluck, gaggle; czirksti, to chirp, twitter; Magy. csergeni, to rattle, rustle. Fr. jargonner, to gaggle as a goose; jargouiller, to warble, chirp, or chatter.
But she withal no word may sowne But chitre, and as a bird jargowne.—Gower in R.
Hence figuratively for an utterance of sounds not understood. It. gergo, gergone, Fr. jargon, gibberish, fustian language, a barbarous jangling.—Cot. In the same way Wall. gazouy, to warble, is also used in the sense of speaking jargon.
Fr. patois, explained by Palsgrave (p. 261) as the recordin of birds, is now used to signify a provincial dialect.
Jaundice. Fr. jaunisse, the yellow disease; jaune, yellow.
Jaunt.—Jaunce. Two ways of writing the same word, as Fr. tancer becomes E. taunt. The fundamental meaning is to jolt or jog. To jounce, to bounce, thump, and jolt, as rough riders are wont to do.—Forby.
Spurgall'd and tired by jauncing Bolingbroke. Rich. II.
Fr. jancer un cheval, to stir a horse in the stable till it be swart withal; also as E. jaunt.—Cot. Manx jonse, a jolt or wince; jonseragh, wincing, acting in a wild, untamely manner.—Cregeen. Sw. dunsa, Dan. dundse, to thump, to fall heavily.
A jaunt or jance is then used in the sense of an outing for pleasure or exercise, as Fr. aller se faire cahoter un peu; Sw. fara ut at skakapd sig, to take a jog, to take exercise.
Faith would I had a few more jeances on't, An' you say the word send me to Jericho. B. Jons., Tale of a Tub, ii. 4.
* Javelin. Fr. javelin, a weapon of a size between the pike and the partizan; javelot, a gleave, dart, or small javelin.—Cot. It. giavellotto, giaverina, a javelin that may be hurled as a dart.—Fl. Bret. gavlod, gavlin, MHG. gabilôt, OE. gavelock, a javelin or dart. Neumann explains Sp. jabalina, as a boarspear, from jabali, a wild boar, but the double form of the word is against that derivation.
Jaw. Jawe or cheek-bone, mandibula.—Pr. Pm. Fr. joue, the cheek, was formerly used in the sense of throat, jaws.
'Garde la ley et le conseil et vie ert a ta alme et grace k tes jowes:'—et erit vita animae tuae et gratia faucibus tuis.—Proverbes.
The cries of different animals, yelping of dogs, chattering of birds, give rise to numerous depreciatory expressions for talking, and thence furnish designations of the mouth, throat, jaws, as the instrument of talk. Thus from Pl.D. kiffen, keffen, to yelp, is kiffe, the jaw; from Du. kaeckelen, Fr. caqueter, to cackle, is Pl.D. käkel, in the same sense as kiffe, the instrument of talk. Holt dog eenmal de käkel, hold your jaw one moment. Hence, throwing off the frequentative termination, Du. kaecke, the jaw, cheek. So from gaghelen, to gaggle, Fris. gaghel, the throat, palate—Kil.; from Wall. chawer, to cheep, cry, chaweter, to chatter as daws, E. chaff, to chirp, chatter (chaf-finch, a chirping bird; chough, a chatter-ing daw), we pass to chaff-bone (Hal.), chaw-bone (Palsgr.), jaw-bone; chavel, chawl, chowl, the jaw. Dan. kiævle, to wrangle, kiæve, the jaw. To kaw, to cry as rooks or daws, to gasp for breath, leads to Du. kawwe, a daw; kauwe, kouwe, a jaw, throat, cheek. Again, from gabble, confused talk, passing into javvle, to con-tend, wrangle (Fr. javioler, to gabble—Cot.), jaul, to scold or grumble (parallel with Dan. kiævle),—Hal., to jaw, to wrangle, we have gab, the mouth, the faculty of speech, jowl, joll, the jaw, and (with the same relation to jowl as was seen in kaecke, the cheek, compared with käkel), Fr. jowe, E. jaw. It will be ob-served that an initial k or ch frequently interchanges with j, even in the same language; Fr. joffu, E. chuffy; E. jowl, chowl, jaw, chaw, Du. kauwe, Dan. kiæve.

Jaw. 2. Jawhole.
Sc. jaw, the dash of the sea; jaw-hole, a gully-hole, sink where slops are thrown. Fr. gachis, splashing; G. gauche, slops; mist-gauche, the draining of the dunghill; schiff-gauche, bilge-water.

Jay.
A bird noted for its chattering cry. Fr. geai, gai, a jay, chough, daw; Sp. gaio, graio, a jay; Du. kauwe, kae, a daw.—Kil. Russ. gai, croaking, E. caw, cry of rooks. Compare It. gazza, a pie, with gazzerare, Fr. gazouiller, to chirp, warble.

Jealous.
Fr. jaloux, from Lat. zelus, zeal, emulation, jealousy.

-ject.
Lat. jacio, jactum, in comp. -jicio, -jectum, to cast, throw, whence OFr. jecter, Fr. jeter, to cast, to put or push forth, and the compounds inject, eject, project, &c.

Jeer.
Written geare, geere by Spencer and Gascoigne. Junius has jeer, yeer, to deride, for which he cites Du. gieren, cum stridore et strepitu alicui illudere. Gieren, to cry loudly, to holloa.—Halma. The form yeer tells against ON. dâra, to make sport of, from dâri, a fool. Florio has giara, giarra, a cheating trick or cozening deceit; giarrare, giarare, to sand, to gravel, by met. to cheat or coney-catch. Giarda, mockerie, jest, trick.—Altieri. Rouchi, girie, tromperie, mau-vaise plaisanterie.—Hécart.

Jelly.
Fr. gelée, the juice of meat or fruit which congeals on cooling; geler, to freeze.

Jeopardy.
From Fr. jeu parti. Mid. Lat. jocus partitus, an even chance, a choice of two alternatives.
Dan moine je vos partirai Deus geus, li malvés lesserez, Et à meillour vos en tanrez.
Fab. et Contes, 4. 24.
Or regardez que vous ferez Que je vous vueil un geu partir.—Ibid. 4. 293.

Jerk.—Jert.
A lash of a whip, a hasty pull or twitch.—B. 'A shake, jert, or blow with the cord of a caveson.'—Cot. OFr. terc, a jerk or jolt.

Jerkin.
Lang. jhergaou, an over-coat; Fr. jargot, a kind of coarse garment worn by country people.—Cot. Du. jurk, a child's slop or pinafore. OFr. jasque, a quilted jacket worn under the cuirass; jazequen, a coat of mail.—Roquef.

Jest.
See Gest.

Jet.
Fr. jaiet, Lat. gagates. 'The geat which otherwise we call gagates car-rieth the name of a town and river both in Lycia called Gages.'—Holland, Pliny in R.

To Jet.
To strut, to carry the body stately or proudly. 'I iette with facyon and countenance to set forthe myselfe, je me braggue.'—Palsgr. in Way.
From Lat. jactare. It. giattare, OFr. jacter, jatter, to brag or vaunt, also to swing, toss, shake up and down; jac-tance, bragging, proud ostentation.—Cot. In the same way Lith. mesti, to cast; metyti, to cast to and fro, to brag, to strut.

Jetty.
Fr. jettée, a cast, also a jetty or jutty, a bearing out in buildings, also the bank of a ditch, or the earth cast out of it when it is made.—Cot. Jetteis, earth cast out of a ditch.—Roquef. Hence E. jetty, a bank carried out into the water.

Jewel.
Fr. joyau, jouel. It. gioia, joy, delight, a gem, jewel, a precious thing; gioie, gioielle, all manner of jewels.—Fl. See Joy. In Mid.Lat. by errone-ous etymology jocale.

Jewise.—Juise.
Fr. juise, judgment, from judicium, as benoiçon, from benedic-tio. 'Si proeves varient eient juyse de pylorie et la partie perde sa demande.'—Lib. Alb. 665.

To Jib.
To start backwards. The jib-sail is a sail which shifts of itself from side to side as required by the wind.—Du. gijpen (of sails), to turn suddenly,—Halma. OFr. regiber, regimber, to kick or wince. 'Uor al so sone so thet flesch haveth al his wil, hit regibbeth anon ase fet kalf.'—Ancren Riwle 130. Jibby, a gay frisky girl.—Hal.
To Jiffle.—Jiffy. To jiffle, to be restless.—Hal. A jiffy is an instant, a turn of the hand. To jib, to turn rapidly back; Fr. gibelet, a gimlet, an instrument that pierces by turning round; W. cipio, ysgipio, to snatch.
Jig. To move to and fro or up and down, a merry dance; jiggetting, jolting, shaking, going about idly; a jigger, any piece of machinery that moves with reciprocating action. Fr. jiguer, to throw the legs about.—Pat. de Champ. Hence vulgarly gigues, the legs, and gigot, a leg of mutton. Bav. gigl (contemptuously), the feet.—D. M. v. See Jag.
Jilt. Sc. gillet, a giddy girl, probably for giglet or giglot, a flighty girl; 'giglet Fortune.'—Shakesp. To jilt one is to behave to him like a jillet, to be inconstant to him.
A jillet broke his heart at last.—Burns.
To Jingle. An imitative form like tingle or G. klingeln, to which last it is related as chink to clink. Comp. also Fr. clinquaille, quinquaille, chinks, coin.—Cot. Da. gungre, to resound, ON. glingra, to jingle. 'Let. jwingsch! (Fr. j) represents the sound of a mowing scythe or a glass window breaking; jwingschkeht, to jingle (klingern), as when a window is beaten in.
To Job. 1. To peck, to strike with a pointed instrument. Byllen or jobbyn as bryddys, jobbyn with the byl, rostro.—Pr. Pm. The nut-jobber is a synonym of the nut-hatch, a bird which breaks open nuts with blows of the bill. Bohem. dubati, Pol. dziobad, to peck; dziob, Gael. gob, the beak of a bird.
Job. 2. An undivided piece of work. Jobbel, jobbet, a small load.—Hal. To work by the job, to undertake a definite piece of work. In the same sense, to work by the gob (Hal.), and gob, gobbet, a lump or portion. Wall, gob, a blow, a piece; gob a' homme, a dump of a man. Baye m'ein ein gob, give me a bit of it.—Sigart. Pl.D. stoot, a blow, a job or piece of work done at one time. Brescian bbt, a stroke, blow; latirà a bbt, to work by the job.
Jobation. To jobe (at the university), to reprimand.—B. Jobation is still in use for a taking to task, such as Job received at the hand of his friends.
Jockey. From Jack (or, with the Northern pronunciation, Jock), in the sense of a person in inferior position. Jocky was specially applied to the servant who looks after horses, now almost confined to the rider of a race-horse.
To Jog. See Jag.
Join.—Juncture. Fr. joindre, from Lat. jungere, the nasalised form of the same root which gives Gr. ζεύγνυμι, to join, ζυγόν, a yoke. Sanscr. yuj, join.
Joist. The joists are the sleepers on which the floor of a room is laid, the bed of the floor. Gyst, that gothe over the flore, solive, giste.—Palsgr. in Way. Fr. giste, a bed, place to lie on, from gesir, Lat. jacere, to lie. The term sleeper, with which railways have made us so familiar, is a repetition of the same figure.
Joke. Lat. jocus, jest, sport; jocari. It. giocare. Prov. jogar, Fr. jouer, to sport, to play. The root of the word seems preserved in Lith. jugstu (Eng. j) or jungu, jugti, to be merry; jaugtis, pajugti, to rejoice; jugulis (exactly corresponding to E. juggler), one who makes sport for the company, a jovial person.
Jolly. It. giulivo, Fr. joli for jolif, gay, fine, also merry, jocund; jolieté, joliveté, prettiness, mirth.—Cot. Not from Jovialis, but from ON. jol, E. yule, Christmas, the great season of festivities in rude times.—Diez. N. jula seg, Du. joelen, to live a joyous life, to make merry.
Jolly-boat. Dan. jolle, a yawl, jolly-boat. The original meaning is probably as in Fr. jalle, jalaye, a bowl; Du. jolleken, a trough. Dan. jolle afsted, to bowl along. See Gallon.
To Jolt. The representation of the sound of a blow admits of infinite variation. To jot, jotter, to jolt roughly—Forby; to jock, to jolt.—Hal. To julk, to sound as liquor shaken in a cask—Forby, to shake, splash, jolt.—Hal. To jolle, to knock. He jowled their heads together.—Mrs Baker. A joult-head, or jolter-head, like logger-head, seems to be from the notion of wagging the head to and fro, and not from the idea of thickness.
Jonquil. Fr. jonquille, Sp. junguilla, the sweet yellow Narcissus with rush-like leaves. Lat. juncus, rush.
Jordan. Properly an earthen pot, synonymous with gally-pot, Du. glei-pot, a clay or earthen pot. Like gally-pot, in modern times the term was specially applied to the vessels in medical use. Our host in the Canterbury Tales, addressing the Doctor of physick, invokes blessings upon—thy urinalles and thy jordanis. Hollinshed speaks of a pretended 'physicus et astrologus' being exposed with two 'jorden pots' hung round his neck, for having deceived the people by a false prediction ; 'duæ ollæ quas jordanes vocamus.'—Walsingham in Jam. Dan., Sw. jord, earth. In like manner Northampton jurnut, a pig-nut, for earth-nut.
To Jostle. To thrust or push with the elbows.—B. A frequentative from OFr. jouster. See Joust.
Jot. To jot, to touch, to jog, to nudge.—Hal. I jotte, I touch one thynge against another, je heurte. What needes thou to jotte me with thine elbowe ?—Palsgr. Du. jotten, Fris. jottjen, jotskjen, to jolt.—Epkema. To fall jot on one's rump, to plump down.—Forby. To jot a thing down, to note it in a book at the moment it occurs.
Then from the connection so frequently observed between the ideas of a short movement and a lump or piece of something, jot is used for a small portion, what is jotted or thrown down at once. The resemblance to Gr. τυψα is accidental. Comp. Sw. dial. datta, a touch, a blow ; detta, to fall ; dutta, to touch or nudge one ; dett, a dot or speck, a lump, bit ; dott, a wisp or tuft of hay, wool, &c. E. dot, a small portion ; a dot of phlegm. The interchange or equivalence of an initial d and j is of frequent occurrence, as in jag, dag; job, dab, a lump ; Sw. jounce, and Sw. dunsa, to thump.
Journal.—Journey. From Lat. dies, a day, came diurnus, daily, and thence It. giorno, Fr. jour, a day, with their derivatives ; journal, a notice of daily events ; journée, a day's work, a day's travel or journey. The original sense of the word is preserved in journeyman, a workman at daily wages.
Joust. It. giostrare, Fr. jouster, to tilt. Derived by Muratori from It. chiostro, chiostra, Lombard ciostra, the enclosed yard in which a tournament was held. But the word has a more extended meaning than this derivation would account for, and the radical signification seems to have reference to the shock of the combatants. Limousin dzusta (dz = Eng. j), to knock at a door ; Fr. jouster, jouter (whence E. jostle), properly to knock, then, with softened significance, to meet together, to join, to abut. See Jot.

Ce m'est avis qu'en Loüneis, Justerent li dux e li reis.
Chron. Norm. 2. 10260.
—the Duke and the King met together.
Mon champ joute au sien, my field abuts upon his, as G. stosst daran, literally, strikes against it. The origin may be traced to ON. thys, OHG. thicz, doz, OSw. dyst, dust, noise, uproar, tumult. Dero wellono doz, fragor undarum.—Notker.
Med dyst swa at stanga gingo sunder.
With a crash, so that their spears flew in sunder.
Chron. Rhythm. in Ihre.
Dan. dyst, combat, shock, set-to. Vove en dyst med en, to try a fall with one. Hence ranna diost, or rida diust, to joust.
Jovial. Cheerful, merry ; qualities supposed to belong to one born under the influence of the planet Jupiter or Jove, as melancholy was promoted by the influence of Saturn.
Jowl.—Jole. Properly the jaws, throat, gullet, often specially applied to the head of a fish. A joll of sturgeon.—B. and F. Geoules of sturgeon.—Howell. Brancus, gole, or a chawle.—Vocab. in Pr. Pm. V. Chavylbone. Jolle, or heed, caput. Jolle of a fysshe-teste. Jawle-bone of a wildebore.—Pr. Pm. and notes. ' The chowle or crop adhering to the lower side of the bill.'—Brown. Vulg. Err. in R. The E. forms seem to have equal claims to a Fr. and AS. ancestry ; OFr. gole, golle, geule, Fr. gueule, the mouth, throat, gullet, also the stomach itself ; gueullard (the equivalent of E. Jowler, Chowler), the muzzle of a beast, also a wide-mouthed fellow.—Cot. On the other hand, AS. geagl, jaw, throat, geajlas, geahlas, the jaws. Viewed in connection with the latter forms, jowl or jole would differ from jaw only in the addition of a final el or l, and the same relation is seen between chowl or chawle, and Du. kauwe, kouwe, kuwe, throat, gullet, cheek, jaw, chin, gills.—Kil.
Joy. Lat. gaudere, gavisus sum; It. godere, gioire, OPtg. gouvir, OFr. gauzir, jauzir, Fr. jouir, to enjoy ; Ptg. goivo, Prov. gaug, joi, It. gioia, Fr. joie, joy.—Diez.
Jub. A jug.
With brede and cheese and good ale in a julle.
Miller's Tale.
It. gobbio, gozzo, a bunch in the throat, goitre, craw, or crop of a bird, by met. any glass with a round big body.—Fl. See Goblet.
Jubilant. Lat. jubilare, to shout for joy.

Judge.— Judicious. Lat. judex (jus dico), It. giudice, Fr. juge.
Jug. A vessel for drink. Jug or Judge was formerly a familiar equivalent of Joan or Jenny. Jannette, Judge, Jennie (a woman's name) ; Jehannette, Jug, or Jinny.—Cot. Now the vessel which holds drink is peculiarly liable to familiar personification. We have black-jack (a jack of leather to drink in—Minsheu), a leathern jug ; Susan, in the district of Gower, a brown earthenware pitcher.—Philol. Proceed. 4. 223. But see Goblet.
\* Juggler.—To Juggle. The juggler was a person whose business was to find amusement for the company on festive occasions by music, recitation, story-telling, conjuring, &c. The word is common to all the Romance dialects, from whence it has passed with more or less corruption into the other European languages. It takes its rise in Lat. jocus, sport, jest, jocor, to sport, to play, joculator, a jester, joculatio, festivity, sport. 'Joculationes cantusque exercebunt.'—Firmicus in Forc. From joculator were formed It. giocolatore, OFr. jugleor, Fr. jongleur, and E. juggler, while It. giocolaro, giullaro, Sp. Prov. joglar, point to jocularis as their immediate origin.—Diez. G. gaukeler, Du. guycheler, kokeler (ludius, gesticulator, mimus, joculator—Kil.), with Boh. kuglar, keyklir, Pol. kuglar, are probably borrowed. In a passage cited by Roquefort, where a jongleur recites his different arts of entertainment, he begins, 'Ge suis juglerres de vielle'—I am a player on the vielle. He soon comes to tricks of sleight of hand. Bien sai joer de l'escanbot (exchange)—Et si sai meint beau geu de table, Et d' entregiet (sleight of hand) et d' artumaire (magic) Bien sai un enchantement faire. It is from this latter part of the juggler's art that the verb to juggle has acquired the sense of conjure, trick, delude.
Jugular. Lat. jugulum, the throat.
\* Juice. Jows of frutys or herbys or other lyke. Jus, succus—Pr. Pm. Fr. jus, juice, sap, moisture, broth—Cot. Lat. jus, jusculum, liquor of things boiled, broth, pottage. The meaning of juice corresponds more exactly with Lat. succus, which in Lang. becomes jhuc, Sp. jugo. Lang. jhuca, to suck.
Julep. It. giulebbe, Fr. julep, a drink made of distilled waters and syrops, or of a decoction sweetened with honey or sugar.—Cot. From Arab juleb, juláb, Pers. gul-áb, rosewater.—Diez.
To Jumble.—Jumble. To rumble, then to shake together. I jumbylle, I make a noyse by removyng of heavy thynges. I jumble as one dothe that can not play upon an instrument, je brouille.—Palsgr. Ne jombre no discordant thing ifere. Chaucer. Fr. and Cr. 2. 1037. Da. skumpe, skumple, to shake, jolt. N. Fris. shumpeln, to jolt ; N. skumpla, to shake liquid in a vessel.
To Jump. Sw. guppa, to rock, to tilt up ; Bav. gumpen, to jolt, spring, jump ; gumper, the plunger of a pump. Connected forms are OFr. regiber, regimber, to kick, giber, to throw about the arms or legs ; Lang. ghimba, to jump, to kick. Sw. dial. skumpa, to jog, jolt, jump, run to and fro ; N. skumpa, to shove, to nudge; Da. skumpe, skumple, to shake, jolt. It. inciampare, to stumble or trip upon.
Jump. 2. A throw, cast, hazard. Our fortune lies Upon fa jump.—Antony and Cle. Plump, without qualification or condition, exact. I'll set her on; Myself the while to draw the Moor apart, And bring him jump where he may Cassio find Soliciting his wife. Ye shall find it make jump six hundred sixty six.—Bale in R. In this sense the word, like the synonymous plump, represents the sound of a lump thrown down in the midst. Jum, a sudden jolt or concussion from encountering an object unawares.
Junior. Lat. junior, compar. of juvenis, young. See Young.
Junk.—Junt. Junk, a lump or piece.—Hal. Old junk is cable or thick rope cut up into short lengths for the purpose of unravelling. 'A good junt of beef.'—Allan Ramsay. Swiss 'jante brod, a hunch of bread.—Idioticon Bernense. Parallel forms are chunk, a log of wood ; chump, a log or thick piece. The chump-end of the sirloin is the thick end. Cob, a lump or piece ; cobbin, a piece of an eel—Hal. ; ON. kubbr, a short thick piece ; N. kubba sund' ein stock, to cut a stick to bits ; kubb, kumb, knubb, a short thick piece.
Junk. 2. Malay jung, a vessel of considerable size.—Crawford.
Junket. It. giuncata, any junkets, viz. dainty fresh cheese, so called because brought to market upon fresh rushes.

—Fl. Thus we may see on Yorkshire cheese the marks of the straws upon which it has been set to drain. Fr. jon-cade, a certain spoon-meat made of cream, rosewater, and sugar.—Cot. The name of junket is still given in Devonshire to a similar preparation. Sc. sunkets, pro-visions, food.
From delicacies of the foregoing de-scription, to junket has come to signify to feast, to frequent entertainments.
Juris.—Jurist.—Jury. Lat. jus, juris, right, law, equity; whence jurare, to affirm with legal rites, to swear; jurata, Fr. jurée, a jury or selection of men sworn to administer the law; jurist, one skilled in the law, &c.
Just.—Justice. Lat. justus, what is in accordance with (Jus) the rights of men.
To Jut. Fr. jecter, jetter, to cast, throw, put or push forth; forjetter, to jut, lean out, hang over.—Cot. Lat. jac-tare, to throw.

To Kaw.—To Keck. To kaw, to fetch one's breath with difficulty. To keck, to make a noise in the throat by reason of difficulty of breathing.—B.; to retch, hawk, clear the throat.—Hal. Hence kecker, squeamish. G. kauchen, keichen, to gasp for breath; Du. kichen, to pant, cough, sob; Lap. kákot, kaklot, to nauseate, properly doubtless to retch.
Kebbers. Refuse sheep taken out of the flock.—B. 'Kebbers or cullers drawn out of a flock of sheep.'—Nomenclator in Hal. From Du. kippen, to pick out, to cull.
Kecks.—Kecky.—Kex. The dry hol-low stalks of last year's growth, especially of umbelliferous plants. Kex, an elder pipe.—Sherwood. W. cecys, reeds, canes; cecysen, cegid. Corn. cegas, Bret. cegit, Lat. cicuta, hemlock.
Kedge. 1. A small anchor. ON. kaggi, a cask fastened as a float to the anchor to show where it lies. From the float the name seems to have been transferred to the anchor itself.
2. Brisk, lively. Kygge (kydge, H.), or joly, jocundus, hilaris.—Pr. Pm. Sc. cady, keady, caidgy, caigie, wanton, lascivious, then cheerful, sportive. OSW. kát, lasci-vious, also cheerful; Da. kaad, wanton, frolicsome. Sw. kättjas, to be on heat. Sc. caige, to wax wanton. Sw. dial. kágas, to be eager; kágg, libidinous, on heat. Lat. catulio, to caterwaul, to be on heat.
Kedge-belly. A glutton; kedgy, pot-bellied; to kedge one's belly, to stuff one's belly. N. kaggie, a keg, small cask, jar, a heap or close-packed mass; figura-tively, a round belly, thickset person.
To Keek. N. kika, Du. kijcken, to peep. Keek, peep, and teet are all used in the sense of looking narrowly, and all seem originally derived from the repre-sentation of a sharp sound. The sylla-ble kik, in Sw. kik-hosta, represents the shrill sound of the throat in whooping-cough. OE. chykkyn as hennys byrdys (to peep as a young chick) pipio—Pr. Pm. Chick is also used to represent the sound made by a hard body breaking, and thence a crack or chip, and it is perhaps from the image of the light shining through a crack that the notion of peep-ing is derived. Thus we speak indiffer-ently of the peep of day, or crack of day. But it may be simply from the notion of shining, so often expressed by a root originally representing a sharp sound. Lap. kiket, to shine.
Keel. ON. kjölr, kjöll, keel of ship, and poet. a ship; AS. ceol, OHG. kiol, a ship, G. kiel, Fr. quille, It. chiglia, the keel of a ship. The word seems to have passed from the Gothic to the Romance lan-guages, and perhaps the G. kiel, the quill or stem of a feather, may exhibit the figure from whence the keel of a vessel takes its name, the ribs of the vessel parting off on each side like the web of a feather from the midrib or stalk.
Keel. 2.—Kayle.—Skayle. G. kegel, Fr. quille, nine-pins. Du. keghel, kekel, icicle. OHG. chegil, kegil, a pin or peg; zelt-kegil, a tent-pin. G. keil, a wedge. If the element -icle in icicle signify ice, as we have supposed, and has no reference to form, it would seem that kegel in the sense of cone or peg radically signifies something in the shape of an icicle.
To Keel.
While greasy Sue doth keel the pot.
Commonly explained to cool, or by others, to scum. The meaning however which would best suit the context is to scour, a sense warranted by the patois of central France, where we have quilland, slippery, polished, shining; acquiller, to scour.
J'acquillais poêles et poêlons, Les marmites et les chaudrons.
Equiller la vaisselle, to scour. Quiller, as couler, to slip or slide.—Jaubert.
Keelson.—Kelson. The piece of timber lying upon the keel in which the mast is stepped.
The topmast to the keelsins then with halyards down they drew.—Chapman, Homer.
Dan. kiol-svin, N. kiole-svill, from svill, G. schwelk, a sill or beam on which something rests in building.
Keen. G. kühn, daring, bold; auf etwas kühn seyn, to be keen after something; kauf-kühn, eager to buy. OSw. kön, kyn, quick, prompt, daring.
To Keep. AS. cepan, to observe, be intent upon; cepan his hearmes, to seek his injury; fleames cepan, fugam capessere, to be intent upon flight. To take keep of a thing, to take notice of it. To keep a day holy is to observe it as holy; to keep your word, to observe it. Fris. kijpen, to look.—Epkema. A similar train of thought is seen in the case of hold, the primitive sense of which seems to be that which is now expressed by the compound behold.
Keg. N. kaggje, a small cask, a jar; W. cawg, a bowl; Sc. cogue, cog, a hooped wooden vessel, a pail; Gael. cogan, a small drinking-dish.
Kell. A child's caul, any thin skin or membrane; any covering like network; the net in which a woman's hair was confined.—Hal. 'Rim or kell wherein the bowels are lapt.'—Fl. See Caul.
Kelter. Readiness for work. He is not yet in kelter.—Skinner. Sw. dial. kiltra sig, to kilt oneself, or tuck up one's clothes, as one preparing for work, operi se accingere.
* Kemlin.—Kimnel. A flat tub used in brewing, for scalding pigs, or the like. Kemplin, kemlings (B.), kembing (Hal.), a brewer's vessel. Du. kam, kamme, a brewery.—Kil. OFr. cambe, a brewing. 'Nus ne puet faire cambe, ne brasser chervoise ne goudale sans son congié.' It may be doubted however whether the word is not rather connected with Sw. dial. kimb. Fin. kimpi, a cask stave, corresponding to Pl.D. kimm, E. chimb, the projecting ledge of a cask. Sw. dial. kimma, a tub, cask; birkimma, a beer cask. Mr Atkinson cites from a record of 1385-96, 'pro ij kympe allec' for two barrels of herrings. Da. dial. kimer, a cooper. In Bremen kimker is a cooper who makes tubs, not casks.
To Ken. ON. kenna, N. kjenna, to perceive by sense, recognise, observe.
Kennel. 1. Fr. chenal, a gutter or kennel; Lat. canale, pipe, channel, water conduit.
2. Fr. chenil. It. canile, a place where dogs are kept. Lat. canis, dog.
Kenspeekle. Northampton skench-back, easy to recognise, conspicuously marked. Sw. kanspak, N. kjennespak, ready at observing, quick at recognising what has once been seen, from kjenna, to recognise, and ON. spakr, wise, prudent. So Sw. dial. minnespak, good at remembering. In E. kenspeekle the sense is inverted, so as to indicate a quality of the object instead of the observer, the latter part of the word being modified as if to signify the marking by which the object is distinguished.
* Kerb. A stone laid round the brim of a well, &c.—B. Any edging of strong solid stuff which serves as a guard to something else.—Todd. 'Elm scarce has any superior for kerbs for coppers.'—Evelyn. Perhaps for crib, which is technically used in the sense of a strong wooden framework. It may, however, be simply curb, as it is often spelt.
Kerchief. Fr. couvrechief, a covering for the head; OFr. chef, chief, head.
Kernel. 1. ON. kjarni, pith, heart, kernel; Fr. cerneau, kernel of a nut, &c. G. kern, pip of fruit, core, inmost or best part of a thing, pith of a tree. Probably from korn, grain; körnen, kernen, to reduce to grain.
2. Fr. carneau, creneau, the battlement of a wall; crenelé, imbattled; cren, a notch, nick, jag. See Cranny.
Kersey. Fr. carisée, creseau, Sw. kersing.
Kestrel. Burgundian cristel, Fr. cresserelle, quercelle, a hawk of a reddish colour. The G. synonym rothel-weihe, from rothel, raddle or red chalk, points to an origin in G. rod-crite, creta rubea.—Dief. Supp.
Kettle. G. kessel, Goth. katil, Bohem. Russ. kotel.
Kevel. A bit for a horse, gag for the mouth. 'Kevel, mordale, camus.'—Pr. Pm. N. kjevla, to gag a kid to prevent it sucking. ON. kefli, Dan. kievle, a short staff, peg, rolling-pin. W. cef, Lat. cippus, a stock. See Gyve.

Key. 1. AS. cæg, Fris. kay, Lat. clavis, Gr. κλεις, κληϊς, a key of a lock. The Lat. and Gr. forms are from claudere, clausum, κλειω, to inclose or shut, as G. schlüssel, a key, from schliessen, to shut. Thus analogy would lead us to derive key from W. cau, to shut, making it identical with W. cae, an inclosure, hedge, garland, Bret. kae, a hedge, or dyke. It is remarkable that Walach. kyae or kyi, a key, an undoubted descendant of Lat. clavis, is almost identical with the E. word, and perhaps this identity in the derivatives may proceed from a radical unity of the parent forms, teaching us to regard W. cau, the origin of cae, an inclosure, and of E. key, as the analogue of Lat. claudo, the origin of clavis. The l of claudo might easily fall away, as the l of G. schliessen, or Sw. sluta, in E. shut, while the final d disappears as completely in Gr. κλυω as in W. cau. Evidence moreover that cae had once a final d may be found in Du. kade, kaai, kae, a dyke or causey; zomer-kade or —kaai, a dyke which confines the waters in summer only; winter-kaai, one which withstands the winter floods.

Key. 2.—Quay. Fr. quai, Ptg. caes, Bret. kae. The Bret. kae, inclosure, hedge, dyke, as well as quay, and Du. kade, kae, dyke, causey, would look as if a quay was regarded in the first instance simply as a dyke or embankment along a river's side. But the true explanation seems to be that given by Spelman, 'Caia, a space on the shore compacted by beams and planks as it were by keys.' The name of key is given in construction to any bond used for firmly uniting separate parts. Thus key-stone is the stone which binds together the two sides of an arch. 'Key, to knitte walls togedyr, clef.'—Palsgr. 'Key, or knyttynge of two wallys in unstabylle grounde, loramentum (concatenatio lignorum, as the word is elsewhere explained—Dief. Supp.) vel caya. 'Keyage, or botys stonding, ripatum.'—Pr. Pm.

Kibe. A sore on the heel. Devonsh. kibby, sore, chapped.—Hal.

To Kick. Words signifying vibratory or abrupt movement are commonly taken from sounds of a similar character. Now Bav. gagkern, gagkezen, kackezen, kickern, kickezen, are used to represent abrupt sounds, such as the clucking of a hen, dry short coughing, stammering, tittering, giggling. Gigkgagk, in nursery language ' a clock, a ticker. Hence gig, gag, kik, appear as roots from whence spring forms signifying abrupt impulsive action.

Tyrol gagejn, goglen, to gesticulate, to toddle as a child; gicken, to stick; gigl, a contemptuous expression for the feet. Fr. dial. giguer, gigasser, to leap, throw about the legs; gigailler, s'ébattre, s'agiter.—Jaubert Gl. du Centre de la Fr. Gigue, gigot, a leg.—Dict. du bas lang. Hence may be explained W. cicio, to kick; cic, a foot; cicwr, footman—Jones; cicwyr, infantry.—Richards.

The same correspondence between the expression of abrupt utterance and muscular action of a similar kind is seen in stammer and stamp; stutter and G. stossen, to hit or kick; Pl.D. staggeln, to stammer, and E. stagger; Sc. habble, to stammer, and E. hobble.

Kickle.—Kittle. Ticklish, unsteady, easily moved. Kickish, irritable; kiddle (of the weather), unsettled.—Hal. N. kita, to tickle, to touch a sensitive place; kitl, tickling, irritation, shrug; kitla, to tickle, touch a sore place, to rub one's shoulders or arms; ON. kida ser, to scratch oneself. Sw. dial. kikklot, rickety, unsteady.

Kickshaw. From Fr. quelquechose, something, applied to an unsubstantial nicety in cookery, and thence extended to unsubstantial gratifications of other kinds.

'There cannot be no more certain argument of a decayed stomach than the loathing of wholesome and solid food, and longing after fine quelqueschoses of new and artificial composition.'—Bp. Hall in N. and Q.

'Fricandeaux, short, skinless, and dainty puddings, or quelkchoses made of good flesh and herbs chopped together.'—Cot.

' (Brainsick.) Yet would I quit my pretensions to all these rather than not be the author of this sonnet, which your rudeness hath irrecoverably lost. (Limberham.) Some foolish French quelquechose, I warrant you. (Br.) Quelquechose ! O ignorance in supreme perfection ! He means a kekshose. (Lim.) Why then a kekshoes let it be, and a kekshoes for your song.'—Dryden, Kind Keeper.

Kid. 1. ON. kid, a young goat; G. kitze, a female cat, a goat; kitzlein, a kid. See Kindle.

Kid. 2.—Kidnap. In rogues' slang kid is a child, agreeing with Lith. kudikis, a child. Hence kidnap, to nab or steal children.

3. A brush-faggot. W. cidys, faggots; cidysen, a single faggot.

4. A pannier or basket.—Hal. Possibly connected with the last sense as being made of twigs. Bav. kotz, kotzen, kützen, a hod or basket for carrying on the back. Boh. koss, a basket, anything made of wicker.

Kiddier.—Cadger. A packman or travelling huxter. Kiddier, kidger, one who buys up fowls, &c., at farm-houses, and carries them to market.—Forby. Persons who bring fish from the sea to Newcastle market are still called cadgers.—Brocket. As pedler, pedder, from the ped or basket in which he carries his wares, so it is probable that kiddier, cadger, are from kid. See Kid, 4.

Kiddle. A basket set in the opening of a weir to catch fish, an implement frequently denounced in our old municipal laws, probably on account of its destructiveness. Fr. quideau, a wicker engine whereby fish is caught.—Cot. Bret, kidel, a net fastened to two stakes at the mouth of a stream.—Legonidec. From kid in the 3rd and 4th senses. Boh. koss, basket, anything made of wicker ; kossatka, a wicker cage for fishing.

* Kidney. Take the hert and the mydrav and the kidnere. Liber cure cocorum, p. 10. In the receipt for hagese, p. 52, the kidney is called nere simply. G. niere was used for the testicles as well as the kidneys, being both glandular bodies of similar shape ; entnieren, to castrate. Hence kidnere may be quid nere, the nere of the quid, ON. kvidr, Sc. kyte, kite, the belly.

Kilderkin. Du. kindeken, kinneken, a small barrel. Comp. Du. kind, E. child.

To Kill. AS. cwellan, to kill ; cwelan, to die. And preyid him that he wolde to him sell Some poison, that he might his rattis quell. Pardoner's Tale. The primitive meaning seems as in Dan. qucele, to strangle, choke, smother. G. qualm, a suffocating fume, thick vapour ; Fin. kuolla, to die, to lose strength and vigour ; kuolen weteen, aquâ suffocor ; kuolettaa, to kill. If choking be the primitive meaning, we may observe a like relation between Fin. kuolla and Lat. collum, neck, as between necare, to kill (properly to choke), and E. neck.

Kiln. An oven for burning bricks or lime, drying malt, &c. w. cylyn, OSw. kolna, kiln ; N. kylna, a drying-house for corn. Sw. dial. kylla, kolla, kolna, to kindle fire. Lat. colina, culina, the kitchen or fire apartment. See Coal.

Kilt. The radical meaning of the word is preserved in Sw. kylsa, a bunch or cluster, Du. kildt brods, a hunch of bread. Kläderna sitta i en kylsa, her clothes hang all in a bunch. Hence OSw. op-kilta, Dan. kilte, to kilt one's clothes, to truss or gather them up into a bunch. The kilt or short petticoat of the Highlander is so called from resembling an ordinary petticoat kilted up for convenience of walking. Sw. kilta barn, to swathe an infant, to make a bundle of it.

Kin.—Kind. AS. cyn, Goth. kuni, kind, family, race ; kuns, kunds, related, of the same family ; aljakuns, of another family, foreign. AS. næddrena cyn, generation of vipers ; moncyn, mankind, ON. kyn, race, family, sex ; kynd, offspring ; Du. G. kind, child, E. kind, kindly, express the loving disposition towards each other proper to the members of a family. When Hamlet accuses his uncle of being ' a little more than kin and less than kind' he is simply contrasting the closeness of the connection with the absence of corresponding affection. The origin is AS. cennan, to beget, the root of which, cen or gen, is somewhat masked in the reduplicate forms, Lat. gigno (gigeno). Gr. γίνομαι (γιγείνομαι, γίγ-νομαι), but is manifest in the derivatives genitus, genus, gens, γένος, offspring, race, kind, sex, γένεα, γένεθλον. Bret, gana, genel, to beget ; w. cenedl ( = Gr. γένεθ-λον), a race ; GaeL. gin, beget ; gineal, offspring ; cine, cineadh, race, family.

To Kindle. 1. To produce young, applied to cats and rabbits. Probably a nasalised form of kittle, notwithstanding w. cenedlu, to beget. It may be observed that Dan. killing (for killing) is applied to the young of both the hare and the cat. See Kitten. 2. To produce fire. ON. kynda, to set fire to ; kyndill, a light, torch, candle ; N. kvende, chips and shavings for kindling fire ; kyndel, kynnel, a torch, whence E. cannel coal, coal that burns like a torch. Lat. candere, to shine, to glow ; incendere, to kindle, inflame, incite. Probably a metaphorical application of the idea of giving birth to, expressed by the root gan, gen, ken, in accordance with the analogy which leads us to speak of the extinction of life or extinction of flame, although in this case the metaphor runs in the opposite direction.

Kindred. The latter part of the word is AS. ræden, condition, equivalent as a termination to E. ship. On tha rædenne, on the condition.—Leg. Inæ. 63. Gefer-ræden, companionship ; mæg-ræden, relationship ; teon-ræden (teonan, to accuse, reproach), quarrel, dispute ; E. hatred, the condition of hate.

King. G. konig, ON. konungr, kongr, king. Lith. kunigas, kuningas, Lett. kungs, lord, noble, an address commonly given to the pastor ; Lit. kuningene, the pastor's wife ; Lett. kundziba, dominion ; keninsch, king. Said to be from Goth. kuni, race, signifying head of the race, as Goth. thiudans, a king, from thiuda, a people. But suspicion is raised by forms like Tartar chan, Wotiak kun, king, empe-ror, kunlen, queen, kunoka, lord, chief.

* Kink. Du. Sw. kink, a twist in a cable, &c. Also a rheumatic stiffness of any part, as a stiff neck (Atkinson), a crick in the neck. NE. kench, a twist or sprain.—Hal. Kneck, among sailors, is explained by Bailey in exactly the same sense as kink, viz. the twisting of a rope or cable as it is veering out. It seems to me probable that kneck or knick is the original form of the word (analogous to crick above mentioned), representing in the first instance a short quick move-ment, a turn or twist. ON. knickja, hnyk-kja, to snatch, to clench or turn back the end of a nail, &c. ; hnickr, hnykkr, a snatch, a trick, a twist in wrestling.

To Kink. 1. Said of children when their breath is long stopped through eager crying or coughing.—B. An imita-tion of the shrill sound of drawing the breath under such circumstances. Chin-cough, king-cough, Du. kick-hoest, kink-hoest, whooping-cough. Sw. kikna, to have the respiration stopped ; kikna af skratt, to chink with laughter.

Kirtle. AS. cyrtel; Sw. Dan. kjortel, a garment either for man or woman.

Kiss. Goth. kukjan, G. küssen, W. cusaw, cusannu, Gr. κυνέω (fut. κυσῶ, κυσσῶ), to kiss ; Sanscr. kuch, kus, ON. koss, kiss.

Analogy would lead us to seek the de-rivation in a word signifying mouth. N. mutt, mouth, mutte (in nursery lang.), to kiss ; Lat. os, mouth, osculum, kiss ; Boh. huba (=Gael. gob, E. gab), the mouth, hubicka, kiss; Prov. cais, mouth, jaws, acaissar, to kiss. In the same way Goth. kukjan may be compared with N. kok, throat, swallow.

Kit. 1. A pail, bucket. Du. kit, kitte, a hooped beer-can.

2. Brood, collection. Du. kudde, a flock ; Bav. kütt, a covey of partridges ; Swiss kütt, an assemblage or crew of people ; Sette Commune kutt, kutta, an assemblage ; kutte va bei, a swarm of bees ; kütten sich, to assemble.

Kitchen. Lat. coquina. It. cucina, G. küche, Du. kokene, keukene ; from Lat. coquere, to boil. See Cook.

Kite. 1. A bird of prey. W. cud, kite ; cudyll y gwint, the kestrell or wind-hover. Bret. kidel, a hawk. From cudio, to hover—Pugh ; cüd, velocity, flight.—Spurrell. So Lith. lingoti, to hover ; linge, kite.

2. A belly. See Cud.

Kith. Acquaintance. AS. cuth, G. kund, known. From AS. cennan, G. ken-nen, to know. Kith and kin, acquaint-ance and relations.

Kitten.—Kitling.—To Kittle. N. kjetla (of cats), to bring forth young ; kjetling, a kitten ; Fr. caller, to kittle as a cat.—Cot. ' Gossype, whan your catte kytelleth I pray you let me have a kyt-tyngc'—Palsgr. in Way.

At first sight we have no hesitation in regarding kittle and kitling, as well as kitten, as derivatives from the parent cat, but it may be doubted whether the name of the animal be not derived from the verb signifying to bring forth young, rather than vice versa. Bohem. kotiti se (of sheep, cats, dogs, &c.), to produce young ; Lat. catulus, a whelp ; Dan. kitling (for kitling), the young of hares or cats. To the same root apparently belong G. kitzlein, E. kid, a young goat ; G. kitze, a she-goat, she-cat, and possibly the word cat itself may have the same origin, as the names of animals are ori-ginally very ill defined, and the designa-tions of general relations of age or sex are apt to be appropriated to particular species. Thus the word stag, which seems properly to signify a male, is in E. appropriated to the male deer, while N. stegg is a gander or male fowl ; E. bitch, a female dog ; Fr. biche, a female deer.

Knack. A snap with the fingers, a trick or way of doing as it were at a snap.

Knacks we have that will delight you, Sleight of hand that will invite you. B. Jonson in R.

Ir. cnog, a knock, crack, &c. In the same way, from Du. knappen, to snap, knap, alacer, celer ; knap-handig, dexter, manu expeditus.—Kil. Avoir le chic, to have the knack of doing something.—Jaubert.

Knick-knacks, trickery, gesticulation, articles of small value for show and not for use.

But if ye use these knick-knacks. This fast and loose with faithful men and true, You'll be the first will find it.—B. & F. in R.

Knacker. A sa'dler and harness-maker—Forby; one that makes collars and other furniture for cart-horses.—Grose S. & E. country words. Doubtless from ON. hnackr, a saddle.

At the present day the name of knacker is chiefly known as signifying one whose business it is to slaughter old worn-out horses, an office analogous to that of the German Schinder or Abdecker, the flayer, who had to dispose of the bodies of dead animals, and of course first stripped off their skin, the only part of any value. It would seem that in England this office fell to the Knacker or coarse harness-maker, as the person who would have the best opportunity of making the skins available. In Flemish patois loroin is the skinner of dead beasts, from lorum, a strap.—Vermesse.

Knag. A projection, a knot in wood. 'The great horns of beetles, especially such as be knagged as it were with small teeth.'—Holland, Pliny in R. A word formed on the same plan with jag or cog, signifying in the first instance a sudden jog, then the corresponding projection in the path of the jogging object, a projection from a solid surface. Ir. cnag, a knock, crack; cnagach (properly jolting), rough or uneven; Sw. knaglig, rugged; Dan. knag, a crack, crash, a wooden peg, cog of a wheel. It. nocco, nocchio, any bunch, knob, snag, or ruggedness in tree or wood.—Fl.

Knap. To snap, to break with a snapping noise. G. knappen, to crackle, crack, to gnaw, bite, nibble, to nip, twitch or break off; also as E. knap (among hunters), to feed upon the tops of leaves, shrubs, &c.; to knapple, to gnaw off.—B. Fin. nappata, to snap at, pluck, snatch, nappia, to pluck as berries; Du. knappen, to snatch, to nab.

Knapsack. From the notion of chewing or gnawing, G. and Du. knappen acquires the sense of eating. Wir haben nichts zu knappen, we have nothing to eat. Hence knap-sack, a provision-sack.

Knave. AS. cnapa, G. knabe, knappe, a boy, youth, servant, a depreciatory term of address to an inferior.
But he that nought hath ne coveiteth to have Is rich, although ye hold him but a knave. W. of Bath.
Du. knegt (the equivalent of E. knight), a boy or servant, as well as knape, have acquired a depreciatory sense analogous to E. knave. Hy is een knegt, gen knape, he is a rogue.
The original meaning is probably a lump (of a boy), from knap or knop, a knob or bunch, as the word boy itself has formerly been explained on the same principle. Gael, cnap, a knob, knot, lump, a stout boy. So also ON. hnaus, a clod; Sw. knos, a knoll; Dan. knos, a lad. Lang, esclapo, a slab of wood, chip, lump of stone; una bel esclapo de filio, a fine-grown girl.

To Knead. ON. hnoða, gnyða, Du. kneeden, G. kneten, to knead; Dan. gnide, to rub; Pl.D. gnideln, to smooth by rubbing with a flat implement. W. cnittio, to strike, twitch, rub gently; Bohem. hnetu, hnjsti, Pol. gnies'ć, to press or pinch (as a tight shoe), to knead.
ON. gnyr, tumultus, strepitus; gnya, gnuddi, to rush violently, to rub, to knead. Stormurinn gnýr á húsum, or gnýðir á húsum, the storm beats upon the house; gnýðr, the rushing of waters.

Knee.—Kneel. G. knie, Gr. γόνυ, Lat. genu.

Knell. Sw. knall, explosion, loud noise, N. gnell, gnoll, noil, shrill cry; Mid.Lat. nola, a bell; Dan. knald, crack of a whip, explosion.

Knick-knack. See Knack.

Knife. Du. knijf, G. kneif, Cat. ganivet, knife; Fr. canif, penknife. An instrument for nipping or snipping; G. kneifen, kneipen, to nip or pinch; kneip-schere, snippers; Du. knippen, snippen, to clip, shear; knip-mes, a razor; W. cneifio, to clip, shear, poll.

Knight. Properly a young man, then a man at arms, fighting man; κατ' ἐξοχήν, the soldier who fought on horseback with armour of defence. AS. cniht, a boy, youth, servant; cniht-cild, man-child. Swiss knecht, strong active youth; knechten, to put forth strength, show activity.
The word is so exactly synonymous with G. knabe, knappe, E. knave, that we are disposed to attribute to it a like origin in Du. knocht, a knot.—Kil.

To Knit. To form knots, to make a texture, like that of stockings, formed of a succession of knots; also to bind together. Pl.D. knutte, a knot; knutten, to make into a knot, to knit. See Knot.

Knob.—Knop.—Knock. The sound of a crack or blow is imitated by the syllables knap and knack, with such variations in the vowel and in the character of the final consonant as may seem to suit the nature of the particular sound in question. Hence are developed two series of forms, ending in a labial and a guttural respectively, and expressing ideas connected with the notion of striking, as the blow itself, the implement with which it is given, the track of the blow, a projection, jutting out, prominence, lump.
Thus, with a labial termination, we

Gael. cnap, to strike, to beat; a button, lump, boss, hillock; w. cnwpa, a knob, a club; E. knap, the top of a hill, or anything that sticks out.—B.; knop, a bud; Du. knoppe, knoop, a knot, a bud; G. knopf, a knob, button, ball, head; Pl.D. knobbe, knubbe, anything thick and round, a knotty stick, a flower-bud; knobken, a small loaf; Dan. knub, a log, block; knubbet, knotty; knubbe, to bang, to thrash.
With a guttural termination, G. knack, a crack or snap; nüsse knacken, to crack nuts; Gael. cnac, crack; E. knock, to strike; Gael. cnoc, a hillock, eminence; w. cnwc, a knob, lump, bunch; Ir. cna-gaim, to knock, to rap; cnagach, rough, uneven; cnagaid, hump-backed; Gael. cnag, a knob; E. knag, a projection.
Knock. See Knob.
Knoll. A round hillock; a turnip.—B. An expression of the class of those explained under Knob. ON. hnalla, to beat with a stick; knallr, a cudgel; G. knollen, a knob, bunch, lump, figuratively a clown. Pl.D. knulle, a hunch, a crumple.
Knot. Another of the forms signifying a knob or projection, derived from the image of knocking or striking. Du. knodse, knudse, a club; knodsen, knudsen, to beat; knodde, a knuckle, a knot; knuttel, a cudgel; Pl.D. knutte, G. knote, a knot; Lat. nodus, a knot, knob. Dan. knude, knot, bump, protuberance. See Knob.
Know. AS. cnawan, OHG. cnahen, Sanscr. jnâ, Pol. znai, Lith. zinoti (i = Fr. y), Gr. γιγνώσκω, Lat. (genoo, genosco) gnosco, to know. The original root seems to be gen or ken, with the sense probably of seize, get, apprehend.
It is singular that the Lat. cognoscere should be reduced in the course of degradation to a form nearly identical with E. know. Cognoscere, Namur conoche, and thence by the change usual in Walloon of the sound of sch into h, Wall. kinohe, to know.
Knowledge. Formerly knowleche, the last syllable of which is the ON. leik, N. leikje, usually employed in the composition of abstract nouns. In AS. and OE. it took the form of lac or leic; AS. reaflac, robbery; OE. schend-lac, derision; wouhlac, seduction; fear-lac, fear; godleic, goodness — Ancren Riwle; Pl.D. bruut-lag, e. wedlock. It is remarkable that the termination lik has exactly the same force in Turkish; Jichigi-lik, the trade of a cooper; kalem-lik, the function of a pen; adem-lik, the quality of man; dagh-lik, mountainous country; beyaz-lik, whiteness; (bakmak, to look) bakmak-lik, the act of looking. Turk. lika, face, countenance; OE. laches, looks, gestures.—Layamon.
Knuckle. Du. knokel, the knotty or projecting part of the joints; knokels van den rug-graet, the vertebræ of the back; knoke, knock-been, the ankle; knoke, a knot in a tree, a bone, because the bones in the living body become conspicuous at their projecting end; G. knochen, bone; knochel, a knuckle, knot, or joint, the joints of the fingers, ankle, toes. See Knob.

Label. OFr. lambel, a shred or rag holding but little to the whole, a label; lambeaux, rags, tatters. Lambeaux or labeaux was also the name given to the fringe (laciniis) hanging from the military cloak—Duc. ; OE. lamboys, the drapery which came from below the tasses over the thighs.—Hal. G. lappen, a rag, lap, lobe; lumpen, a rag, tatter; It. lembo, the skirt or lap of a garment, anything that flaps or hangs loose; Milan. lamp, a lap, skirt, rag, slice. See Lap.
Labial. Lat. labium, a lip.
Labour.—Laboratory. Lat. labor.
Lace. Lat. laqueus, Prov. lac, laz, latz. It. laccio, Fr. lacqs, a lace, tie, snare, noose; Prov. lassar, lachar, Fr. lacer, to lace, bind, fasten. The lacing is thus the binding of a garment, and the name has been appropriated to the border of gold or silver tissue, of silk or open thread-work used as an ornamental edging to garments of different kinds. See Latch.
Lacerate. Lat. lacer, torn, ragged; lacinia, a jag, snip, piece, rag, lappet of a gown. Gr. λάκις, a rent, tatter; λακίζω, to tear. From the sound of tearing, Gr. λάσκω, ἔλακον, to crack, creak, sound, scream.
Laches. Negligence.

Then cometh lachesse, that is, he that whan he beginneth any good work, anon he wol forlete and stint it.—Parson's Tale; OFr. lasche, slack, remiss, faint; Lat. laxus, loose. See Loose.
Lack. 1.—Lake.—Lacker. Lack, an East Indian resin of a red colour, the pigment extracted from which is Lake. Fr. lacque, sanguine, rose or ruby colour.—Cot. Lacquered ware is ware covered with a varnish of lack. 'The lack of Tonquin is a sort of gummy juice that drains out of trees. The cabinets to be lackered are made of fir or pine tree.'—Dampier in R. Du. lak-werk, lackered ware. The name is then extended to other kinds of varnish. Fr. lacre, a cement of rosin, brimstone, and wax.—Cot. It. lacca, white lead, also a kind of white varnish; laccare, to paint or daub over with lacca, to paint as women do their faces.—Fl.
2. Lack had formerly two senses, identical with those of Du. lack, laecke, want, defect, fault, blame; laecken, to decrease, become deficient, also to accuse, to blame. Of these senses the notion of fault or blame might be incidental to that of deficiency or want, but it is probable that the two uses of the word are from totally different sources. The origin of lack, want, is seen in Swab. lack (properly slack), slow, faint. To lack then is to become slack, to cease, to be wanting. In like manner G. flau, faint, feeble; diese waare wird flau, this article lacks or is no more sought for—Kiittner, the demand becomes slack. Du. laeckende waere merx decrescens; laecken, minuere, decrescere, deficere paulatim, deesse.—Kil. Namur lauk, slack; Wall. laker, to slacken, cease, give over. I n' lake nin d' ploure, it does not cease to rain.—Grandg. Again, from E. dial. lash, lask, slack, loose, watery; to lask, to shorten, lessen.—Hal. On the other hand lack, in the sense of blame, seems to be for clack, clag, Pl.D. klak, klaks, G. kleck, a spot, blot, stain, disgrace; einem enen klak anhangen, to fix a blot upon him. Sc. clag, an encumbrance, charge, impeachment. 'He has nae clag till his tail,' no stain on his character. He was a man without a clag. His heart was frank without a flaw. Pl.D. een lak, (or more frequently) enen klak in de ware smiten, to find fault with wares; Sw. lak, vice, fault.
Lackey.—Lacket. Than they of Haynault bought little nagges to ride at their ease, and they sent back their lackettes and pages.—Berners, Froissart in R. Fr. laquais, a footman; OFr. naquet, naquais, an attendant at a tennis-court; naqueter, to stop a ball at tennis, also to wait at a great man's door, to observe dutifully, attend obsequiously.—Cot. The name seems to be taken from the nacket's office of catching the ball. Fr. nague-mouche, a fly-catcher. A sharp sound is represented by the syllable knack, as in G. knacken, to crack, Fr. naquer, to gnaw with a snapping sound like a dog; naqueter des dens, to chatter with the teeth. Thence the term is applied to any quick abrupt movement, as in the sense of catching, or in Bav. knacken, a stroke; Fr. naqueter de la queue, to wag the tail. The interchange of an initial l and n is not infrequent, as in It. livello and nivello, Lat. lympha and nympha; N. lykjel and nykjel, a key; Sp. lutria and nutria, an otter.
Laconic. Gr. Λακωνικος, after the manner of the Lacones or Spartans.
Lacteal. Lat. lac, lactis, milk.
Lad.—Lass. Lad was formerly used in the sense of a man of inferior station. Sixti and ten Starke laddes, stalworthe men.—Havelok. To make lordes of laddes Of land that he winneth, And fremen foule thralles That follwen noght his lawes.—P. P. 1325. When laddes weddeth leuedies. Prophesy of Thomas of Ercildoune in Havelok. Gloss. It would seem to be the same word with OHG. laz, libertinus (G. freigelassner); frilaz, manumissus; hantlaz, libertus.—Graff. 'Sunt etiam apud illos (Saxones) qui edhilingi, sunt qui frilingi, sunt qui lazzi illorum linguâ dicuntur, Latinâ vero linguâ hoc sunt; nobiles, ingenui, atque serviles.'—Nithardus in Graff. G. lasse, Du. laete, a peasant bound to certain rents and duties, corresponding to our copyhold tenures. The word is Latinised in various ways, litus, lidus, ledus, adscriptitius, servus glebæ.—Duc. 'Et Saxones omnes tradiderunt se illi et omnium accepit obsides tam ingenuos quam et lidos!'—Annales Franc. ibid. In the Frisian laws the composition of a litus was double that of a slave and half that of a freeman. Mid.Lat. leudus, leudis, a vassal, subject, AS. leod, a people, G. leute, people, Goth. jugga-lauds, a young man, may probably be distinct. The difficulty in identifying E. lad with

OHG. *laz* arises from the fem. *lass* (for *laddess*), which is not in accordance with the Sax. idiom, and would look like a derivation from W. *llodes*, a lass; *llawd*, a lad.
* Ladder. AS. *hlædre*, OHG. *hleitar*, G. *leiter* (fem.), Pol. *letra*, a ladder.
Possibly the word may signify a pair of poles or spars. G. *latte* (in some cases), a bar or pole, a young, slender, and straight tree in a forest.—Küttn. Pl.D. *lade*, the shoot of a tree.—Brem. Wtb. *Laede* (ger. sax. sicamb.), *tabula, asser*.—Kil. AS. *latta, asseres*.—Lye. Sw. dial. *lädda*, Da. dial. *latter, vognlætter*, or *leirer*, E. dial. *ladders, lades* or *ladeshrides*, the framework of bars fixed on the side of a waggon to carry corn. Sw. dial. *läder*, two spars fastened to each other at a certain interval, and used as the framework of a waggon to carry casks or large stones. G. *lade*, a framework of different kinds. Du. *laede, wevers-laede*, the comb or reed, composed of two rods fastened to each other by a number of teeth (like a ladder) between which every thread of the warp passes singly. See Lathe.

Lade. I. Lade, a ditch or drain.—Hal. A lade, mill-lade, or mill-leat, is the cut which leads water to a mill. AS. *lad*, a canal, conduit; Du. *leyde, water-leyde, acquæductus, aquagium*.—K. AS. *lædan*, Du. *leyden*, to lead.
* To Lade.—Load.—Ladle.—Last. ON. *hlaða*, to lay in regular order, to pile up, to build a wall, to pack herrings, to pave a floor; *hlað*, anything piled up or laid in regular order; Da. *lade*, to load, OHG. *hladan*, G. *laden*, to load. AS. *hladan, hlod, gehladen*, to pile up, to load, also to draw water, to bring bucket after bucket to the receptacle, analogous to piling up objects on a heap. *Hlædle*, a ladle or implement for lading liquids. *Hlæst*, ON. *hlass*, G. *last*, the loading or burden of a ship, E. *last*, a certain quantity of corn, fish, wool, &c. In a secondary sense to *lade* (of ships) is to let in water, to leak.
—the ship Whiche was so staunche it myghte no water lade.
Hal.

Lady. AS. *hlæfdige*.
Lady-cow.—Lady-bird. The name of a well-known, small, spotted, hemispherical beetle, dedicated to Our Lady, as appears by the German name *Marien-käfer* or *Gottes-kühlein*, in Carinthia *Frauenküele*. In Brittany it is called *la petite vache du bon Dieu*, and Bohem. *Bozj krawicka*, God's little cow, has the same meaning. The comparison of a beetle to a cow seems strange, but in other cases the name of cats, dogs, sheep, are given to insects of different kinds, and Pol. *krowka*, little cow, is the name given to the dung-beetle. The large black beetle, popularly called Devil's coach-horse, is in ON. *Jötun-oxi*, the Giant's ox, the Jötun in Northern mythology filling the place of the Devils in Jewish, while the ox or beast of the plough is exchanged in modern times for the more conspicuous coach-horse.
The other name, Lady-bird (by which Lady-cow is being rapidly supplanted), was probably given as seeming more appropriate to a flying creature; but *bird* may here be a corruption of *bode* or *bud*, a name given to insects of different kinds, as *sharn-bode*, dung-beetle, *wool-bode*, hairy caterpillar.—E. Adams on names of insects in Philolog. Trans.

To Lag. To trail behind, to flag. As in muscular exertion the limbs are made rigid, the idea of the opposite condition, faintness, laziness, slowness, is expressed by the figure of what is loose or slack. W. *llag*, loose, slack, sluggish; Gael. *lag*, feeble, faint; Esthon. *lang*, lank, loose, slack; Gr. *λαγαρος*, slack, pliant; *λαγγαζω, λαγγεω*, to slacken; Bav. *lugk*, loose, not tight.
The origin of all these terms is a representation of the sound of a loose body flapping or rattling. E. dial. *log, logger*, to oscillate, shake as a loose wheel; G. *locker*, loose, &c. See To Log.

Lagoon. Lat. *lacuna*, a ditch, puddle, drain, a little hole or hollow place, a gap; It. *lacuna, laguna*, a moor, wash, fen, ditch where water stands, a drain.—Fl. Sp. *laguna*, 'stagnant waters, marshes.'

Lair. A lying place, now confined to a lying place for beasts.
The mynster church, this day of great repayre, Of Glastenbury where now he has his *leyre*.
Hardyng in R.
Du. *leger*, bed, sleeping place, lair of a beast, camp or place occupied by an army; Dan. *leir*, camp; from Du. *leg-gen*, to lie; *te bedden, te velde leggen*, to lie in bed, to camp. AS. *leger*, a lying, whether in the grave or in bed; *legeres wyrthe*, worthy of burial; also the cause of lying or disease; place of lying or bed; lying with or adultery; *leger-gyld*, OE. *lair-wite*, a fine for adultery.—B.

Lake. I. A pigment. See Lack.

2. Fr. lac, Lat. lacus.
To Lam. To give a beating to. ON. lemja, to give a sound drubbing, N. lemja, to beat. Du. lam-slaen, enervare verberibus; lam, flaccid, languid, weak; lamme leden, membra dissoluta; Piedm. lam, loose, slack. To lam then would be to beat faint, to exhaust with blows, analogous to Dan. mör-banke, to give a sound drubbing, literally to beat tender.
Lamb. Esthon. lammas, lamba. Fin. lammas, lampaan, a sheep; lampuri, a shepherd. Lap. libbe, a lamb.
Lambent. Lat. lambo, to lick with the tongue. A nasalised form of lap.
Lame. Broken or enfeebled in some of the members. Serv. lomiti, to break; loman, broken, tired; Pol. lamad, to break; lamanie w nogach, gout in the feet; Dan. laan, palsied, paralytic; Du. leme, lemte, mutilatio, vitium—Kil.; ON. lami, broken, enfeebled, impaired; lami, a break, fracture; lama, to weaken, impair; lam, a fracture, enfeebling; lama, membris fractus vel viribus; föt-lama, far-lama, incapacitated in the feet, in the power of walking.
It must be admitted that the meaning of lame sometimes approaches very closely that of Du. laf, lam, flaccid, languid, weak; Piedm. lam, loose, slack; N. lama, lamen, fatigued, exhausted, unstrung.
Comp. Du. lammelick, languidè, remissè, segniter, with E. lamely; lamme sanck, inconditum et ineptum carmen, a lame production; lamme leden, membra dissoluta; lam-slaen, enervare verberibus, to disable or make lame by blows.
Lament. Lat. lamentari.
Lamina.—Laminate. Lat. lamina, a thin flake or slice.
Lammas. On the first of August, the feast of St Peter ad Vincula, it was customary in AS. times to make a votive offering of the first-fruits of the harvest, and thence the feast was termed Hlaf-mæsse, Lammas, from hlaf, loaf. In the Sarum Manual it is called Benedictio novorum fructuum.—Way in Pr. Pm.
Lamp. Gr. Λαμπὰς, whence Lat. lampas. Gr. λάμπω, to ring, sound loud and clear, then to give light, to shine. ON. glam, glamr, clang, rattle, noise; glampa, to gleam, glitter, shine.
Lampoon. The syllables taterletat, tanterlantant, representing sound without sense, are used in Pl.D. as interjections, like fiddlededee! expressing contempt for what a person says. Taterletât, a toy trumpet, or the noise which it makes; ene olde taterletat, an old tattle-basket; tanterlantant, trifles; tantern, to tattle, to trifle. Equivalent expressions are Lang. ta-ta-ta! Fr. tarare! a fiddlestick! pshaw! (Boileau); and also lanturelu! lanturlu! fudge! stuff! (Spiers), nonsense! (Tarver), of which the prominent syllable, lant (as tant in G.), has been made the basis of verbs signifying to talk nonsense, to trifle; lantiberner, to weary with idle stories (Dict. bas lang.); lanterner, to talk nonsense, trifle with, to fool (Spiers); lantiponner, to talk nonsense, to trifle, harceler quelqu'un en le tiraillant.—Trevoux. Then as lantiberner seems contracted to lanterner, so lantiponner would produce lamponner, explained by Cot. as synonymous with lanterner, to dally or play the fool with, to cog, foist, fib. The primary meaning of lampoon then would be a piece of foolery or nonsense, making fun of a person, and incidentally a satirical attack.
Lamprey. Fr. lamproie. It. lampreda, Lat. lampetra, 'a lambendis petris,' from licking stones.—Voss. In support of this etymology Trench cites the OE. names suckstone and lickstone. 'A little fish called a suckstone, that stayeth a ship under sail, remora.'—Withal.
Lance.—Lanceolate.—Lancet. Lat. lancea, Gr. λόγχη, a lance, spear, spear-head.
Land. Goth., ON. land.
Landscape. A delineation of the land, from AS. sceapan, to shape or form. So N. fiellskap, the outline of a range of hills. Eg kienne land 'e paa fiellskap, I know the land by the line of hills.
Lane.—Lawn. Du. laen, an alley, opening between houses or fields. Sc. loan, loaning, an opening between fields of corn left uncultivated for the sake of driving the cattle homewards.—Jam. Fris. lona, lana, a narrow way between gardens and houses. Dan. dial. laane, lane, a bare place in a field where the corn has failed; lane, an open or bare place; E. lawn, lawnd, an open space between woods; W. llan, a clear place, area, or spot of ground to deposit anything in.
The fundamental idea is probably the opportunity to see through given by an opening between trees or the like; N. glana, gleina, to stare, to look steadily, to open (as clouds) and leave a clear space; glan, an opening among clouds; glanen (of a wood or of clouds), open, separate, so that one may see through; glenna, a clear open space among woods, grassplot between cliffs and wood; gleina, an open space.

Language. Lat. lingua, a tongue, language, whence Fr. langue, langage.
Languid.—Languish. Lat. langueo, to be faint, without life and spirit. Gr. λαγγέω, λαγγάζω, to slacken, give up; λαγγών, a loiterer. See To Lag.
Laniard.—Lanyel.—Langet. It is probable that langet, langel, lanyel, a strap or thong, tether, strip of ground, must be separated from Fr. lanière, E. laniard, a narrow band, a thong; lanier, the lash of a whip.—Forby. The former are certainly from Lat. lingula, a little tongue, narrow pointed object. It. lingua, a langet or spattle, linguella, linguetta, the point or langet of a pair of scales, a tenon.—Fl. Langot of the shoe, latchet.—Kennett in Hal. Langelyn or bynd together, colligo, compedio.—Pr. Pm. Lanière on the other hand seems from longière (a long narrow towel—Cot.), signifying a strip. Limousin loundieiro, Fr. allonge, piece that one adds to lengthen anything. Allonge or longe was also used in the sense of It. langolo for the lunes or lemins of a hawk, the leather thongs by which his legs were attached to the wrist in carrying him. Fr. longe, Wal. long, signifies also a long strap fastened to the halter of a horse, whence the expression to lunge a colt, in breaking him in, to hold him with a long rope and drive him round in a circle.
The g of long disappears occasionally in the Fr. dialects, as Wal. lon, slow, long, far.—Remacle. Lim. loung, loun, slow, tedious, long. It. lungi, Fr. loin, far; esloingier, eloigner, to put to a distance. Bret. louan, a thong or strap, especially that by which the yoke is fastened to the ox's head.
Lank. Du. slank, G. schlank, slender, pliant. A nasalised form of the root which appears in E. slack, Gael. lag, weak, faint, with the fundamental signification of absence of rigidity.
Du. lank, the flank or soft boneless part of the side; Devonsh. lank, the groin.
Lansquenet. G. lanzknecht, a soldier serving with lance.
Lantern. Fr. lanterne, Lat. laterna, as if from AS. leoht, light, and -ern, place, an element seen in domern, judgment-place, heddern, hiding-place, bakes-ern, oven, and lihtes-ern, a lantern. In lucerna the same element is joined with lux, lucis, light.
The spelling of lanthorn, which so long prevailed, was doubtless influenced by the use of transparent sheets of horn for the sides of the lantern.
Lap.—Lappet. The flap or loose skirt of a garment.
Like flap, clap, slap, a representation of the noise made by a loose sheet striking against itself or any surface.
ON. lapa, slappa, to hang loose; Du. labberen (of sails), to shiver in the wind; G. lapp, slack; lappen, anything hanging loose, rag, tatter, clout; bart-lappen, the wattles of a cock; ohr-läppchen, lobe of the ear; AS. læppa, a lap or lobe of the liver.
A lapwing is a bird that flaps its wings in a peculiar manner as it flies.
To Lap. I. Fr. lapper, to lap or lick up; Gr. λάπτω, to lap, then to drink greedily; Lat. lambere, to lick; Fr. tamper, to drink, to swill.
In E. cant the term lap is used for liquid food, wine, pottage, drink. From the sound of lapping up liquids with the tongue.
2. To lap or wlap, to wrap. 'Lappyn or whappyn yn clothes, involve.' 'Plico, to folde or lappe'—Pr. Pm. 'He was wtappid in a sack (obvolutus est sacco).'—Wiclif.
From the root wlap spring It. inviluppare, Fr. envelopper.
To lap in the present sense is to bring the lap or flap of the garment round one; the forms wlap and flap corresponding together, as Du. wrempen and E. frump.
Lapse. Lat. labor, lapsus, to fall, sink down.
Larboard. The left side of the ship looking forwards. Du. laeger, OE. leer, left. 'Clay with his hat turned up o' the leer side too.'—B. Jonson in Nares.
Du. laeger-hand, the left hand, from laeger, lower, as hooger-hand, the right hand, from hoog, high.
It is, however, against this derivation that the word is written ladde-bord in the Story of Jonah, Allit. Poems of xiv. Cent., E. E. Text Soc.
Larceny. Fr. larcin, robbery, from Lat. latrocinium, robbery; latro, a robber.
Lard. Lat. lardum, bacon, bacon fat. Bret. lard, fat, grease; lardi, to grease, to fatten.
Large.—Largess. Lat. largus, of great size, copious, liberal, whence Fr. largesse, liberality, gifts.
Lark. AS. laferc, Sc. laverock, Du. leeuwercke, lewerck, lercke.
Larrup. To beat. Du. larp, a lash; larpen, to thresh in a peculiar manner, bringing all the flails to the ground at once.—Bomhoff.
To Lash. I. To strike with a sounding blow, as when a whale lashes the sea or a lion his flanks with his tail. To lash out, to throw out the heels with violence; lasher, a weir, from the dashing of the water. Like clash or slash, a representation of the sound. Esthon. laksuma, to smack, to sound like waves when they lash the shore. G. klafschen, to yield that sound which is represented by the word klatsch; lashing with a whip, clapping of the hands, clashing of arms.—Küttn. Du. kletsen, to clash, clack, crack, to fling; klets, lash, slap.

2. To bind or fasten anything to the ship's sides.—B. Du. lasch, a piece set on or let into a garment, also the place where the joining is made, the welding of two pieces of iron together, splicing of rope-ends; lasschen or lassen, to join two pieces together; Dan. laske, to baste, stitch, mortise; N. laskje, a gore or patch; aarelaskje, the patch of hard wood let into an oar to protect it from the rullocks; Bav. lassen, einlassen Bretter ineinander, to scarf boards together, to let one into the other; die Gelass or Gelassen, the joining.

Lass. See Lad.

Lassitude. Lat. lassus, weary.

Last. I. Contracted from latest, as best from delst. G. letzt; Bav. lesst, Pl.D. lest. Zi lezzist, zu lazzost, demum; zu dem lesten, extreme.—Gl. in Schmeller.

2. A burden. ON. hlass, AS. hlæst, Du. G. last, a load; ON. hlada, to load, to pile up, G. laden, to load.

3. The form of a shoemaker. Du. leest, make, form, shape; G. leisten, model, mould, form, size. 'Ein Spanischer Roß, ob es gleich klein von Leist, ist es doch adelich von Gestalt,' though small of size is noble in form. 'Ein Pfarrer soll ein Bildner und Leist sein zu leben seinen Unterthanen,' a pastor should be a model to his parishioners.

The origin is probably AS. last, Goth. laist, trace, footstep; Wagen-gelaist, the trace of the wheel; the impression of a thing showing the size and form without the substance of the original.

To Last. Properly, to perform, but now confined to the special sense of performing the duty for which a thing is made, enduring. When we say that a coat will last for so many months, we mean that it will serve the purpose of a coat for so long. G. leisten, to fulfil, perform, carry out. 'And thei ben false and traiterous and lasten noght that thei bihoten.'—Sir Jno. Mandeville.

As Lat. sequi, to follow, gives exsequi, to follow out, perform, accomplish; or G. folgen, to follow, befolgen, to perform (Befehl befolgen, to perform one's command), so to last, from Goth. laist, AS. last, a trace, footstep, to tread in one's footsteps, to follow, to fulfil: Span thu hine georne, Thæt he thine lare læste: urge thou him zealously that he may follow thy instruction.—Cædm. x. 1. 58.

Goth. laistjan, afarlaistjan, to follow after; fairlaistjan, to attain. The legal expression in pursuance of is used in the sense of in fulfilment or execution of.

To Latch. To catch. AS. laccan, gelæccan, to catch, to seize; Gael. glac, catch. The word seems to represent the sound of clapping or smacking the hand down upon a thing, or perhaps the snap of a fastening falling into its place.

Latch.—Latchet. From Lat. laqueus, are formed Fr. lacs, It. laccio, any latch or lachet, binding-lace or fillet, halter, snare to catch birds or beasts—Fl.; Rouchi lâche, a noose, leash, lace; lachet, as Fr. lacet, a tie or fastening. Pol. łapać, to catch, corresponds to E. latch, as snap to snatch, clap to clack; Lat. capere, to E. catch.

Late. ON. latr, OHG. laz, slow; G. lass, faint, negligent, lazy; Bav. lass, slack, loose, slow. The radical meaning is, doubtless, slack, unstrung, then inactive, slow, behindhand. See Loiter.

-late, -lation. Lat. fero, latum, to bear, bring; confero, to bring together; collatio, a comparison, whence to collate, to compare; to translate, to carry over; prælatus, advanced before the rest, a prelate; oblation, an offering; legislate, to carry laws.

Latent. Lat. lateo, to lie, or be concealed, or unnoticed.

Lateral. Lat. latus, lateris, a side.

Lath.—Lattice. Fr. Du. G. latte, a thin piece of cleft wood; G. latte is also used for a pole or rod, a young slender tree in a forest. The primary meaning is doubtless the shoot of a tree. Russ. loza, a rod, branch, twig; G. lode, a sprig or shoot; Bret. laz, a pole, fishing-rod; W. llath, a yard, or measure of three feet; Gael. slat, a switch, wand, yard. Fr. lattis, E. lattice, lath-work.

Lathe. A turner's frame, called by Cot. a lathe or lare. G. lade, a frame, what holds or incloses something else; the framework of a plough or harrow, a chest, coffer, receptacle. Kinnladen, the jawbones in which the teeth are held; Bettlade, a bedstead; Kammlade, the basis which holds the teeth of a wool-card; Tischlade, a drawer. Du. laede, laeye, a receptacle, case, chest; laede van de waege, the receptacle for the tongue of a balance. Commonly connected with E. lade, to lay up, lay in order. Linc. ladh, to place or set down.—Hal. ON. hlada, Sw. lada, OE. lathe, a barn, a receptacle for hay, corn, &c. See To Lade. It is possible, however, that the radical meaning may be a construction of bars or rods. Laede, tabula, asser.—Kil. See Ladder.
Lather, NE. lather, to splash in water.—Hal. ON. lödra, to foam; lödr, foam of the sea; Sw. såp-löder, soap-suds; Bav. loder, suds, dirty water from washing; Swiss ladern, lättern, plädern, plättern (from an imitation of the sound), to dabble in water, make wet and dirty, let fall liquid dung (of cows); kuhpläder, cow-dung; verlätteren, to dawb with cow-dung; G. plätschen, to paddle or dabble in water; Dan. pladder, mud, mire.
Latiner. Fr. latinier, one who speaks Latin, an interpreter.
Latitude. Lat. latus, broad.
Latten. Brass, tinned iron. Fr. laiton. It. latone, ottone, brass; latta, tin plate. From being used in the shape of plates.—Diez. Piedm. lata, thin narrow piece of iron or other metal, plate, blade. Way cites a document of the 15th century which speaks of 'latten, or Cullen (Cologne) plate.'
Laudable.—Laudatory. Lat. laus, -dis, praise.
Laugh. G. lachen, Du. lachachen, lachen—Kil.; from the sound.
To Launch. Fr. lancer. It. lanciare, violently to throw, hurl, dart; lanciare un cervo, to rouse a stag. Probably lancia, a lance, is from the verb, and not vice versâ; a weapon to be hurled. A nasalised form of E. lash, to throw out.
Laundry.—Laundress. It. lavare, to wash; lavanda, suds, anything to wash with; Fr. lavage, washing; lavandière, a washerwoman; Sp. lavadero, a washing-place; lavandero, a washer; lavanderia, the wash, linen for washing. To the last of these forms corresponds E. laundry, the washing department, and from laundry is formed laundress.
Laurel.—Laureate. Lat. laurus, the laurel, laureatus, one crowned with laurel.
Lave.—Lavatory. Lat. lavare, to wash, bathe, lavator, one that washes. Radically connected with ON. lögr (g. lagar), AS. lagu, water, liquid. ON. laug, bath, water to wash in; lauga, Da. löve, to bathe, to wash.
Lavender. Fr. lavende, from being laid with fresh-washed linen, to perfume and preserve it from mildew. It. lavanda, a washing.
Laver. A sea weed, otherwise called sea liver-wort, looking as if the word were a corruption of liver.
Lavish. Prodigal. Fr. lavasse, or lavace d'eaux, an inundation. The idea of unthrifty dealing is often expressed by the dashing abroad of water. It. guazzare, sguazzare, to dabble or plash in water; guazzare, to lavish in good cheer; sguazzare, to lavish his estate—Fl.; Sw. pluttra, properly to dabble, corresponding to Sc. bluiter, in a similar sense, and to Dan. pludder, slush, mire; Sw. pluttra bort penningas, to squander money. And squander itself is a repetition of the same metaphor.
Law. ON. lag, order, method, custom, law. From leggia (hefi lagt), to lay. So Lat. statutum, statute, from statuere, to lay down; G. gesetz, law, from setzen, to set; Gr. θεσμός, law, from τίθημι, to lay.
Lawn. 1. See Lane.
2. A kind of fine linen, Fr. linon, from which however the E. word can hardly have been derived. Sp. lona, canvas, a texture agreeing with lawn in being open and transparent. It is remarkable that lawn, an open space between woods, seems to be so called from the opportunity it affords of seeing through.
Lax.—lax. Lat. laxus, loose, slack; laxare, to make loose, relax.
Lay.—Laity. 1. Lat. laicus,—OHG. leigo, laih, leih, Du. leek, from Gr. λαϊκός, of the λαός or people, as opposed to the clergy.
2. A song, metrical tale. Prov. lais, song, piece of poetry, song of birds, clang, cry; lais dels sonails, the sound of bells. Tuit s'escridon a un lais, all cried out with one voice.—Rayn. As the old Fr. poets (as Diez observes) regard the lay as specially belonging to the Bretons, it is natural to look to the Celtic for the origin of the word.
Les cuntes ke jo sai verais, Dunt li Breton unt fait lor lais, Vus cunterai assez briefment.
Marie de France.
W. llais, a sound, note, tone, voice; Gael. laoidh, laoi, a verse, hymn, sacred poem; ON. hliod, liod, voice, sound, also as AS. leoth, a lay or short poem; G. lied, song; Goth. liuthon, psallere, to sing hymns.
Lay. 3.—Lea.—Laystall. Lay-land or fallow-land might plausibly be explained land laid up from immediate use, in accordance with Sw. lägga igen.

aker, to lay up a field or leave it fallow. But the word is undoubtedly the analogue of Du. ledig, leeg, empty, vacant, fallow; ledig-land, G. leede, lehde, an uncultivated piece of ground; der ledige stand, unmarried life, celibacy.
Let wife and land lie lay till I return. B. and Fletcher.
Another form of the word is E. ley, lea, AS. leag, leah, the untilled field, pasture.
Plenty shall cultivate each scaup and moor, Now lea and bare because thy landlord's poor. Ramsay.
Though many a load of marl and manure laid Revived his barren leas which erst lay dead. Bp Hall in R.
A clover-ley is a field in which clover has been sown with the former crop, and which is left without further cultivation after the crop is carried. Dan. dial. lei, fallow; híd ager, novalis; leid jord, cessata terra.—Molbech.
Laystall. Properly lay-stow, where lay has the same sense of vacant, unoccupied, as in lay-land, an empty place in which rubbish may be thrown. 'The place of Smithfield was at that daye a laye-stowe of all order of fylth.'—Fabyan in R.

Lay. 4.—Layer. A lay, a bed of mortar.—B. In the same way Fr. couche, a layer, from coucher, to lay. Du. laag, lay, layer, bed, stratum; leger, a lying place. Pl.D. lage, a row of things laid in order, tier of guns; afleger, a layer or offset of a plant laid in the ground to strike root.

To Lay. ON. leggia, G. legen, to lay; ON. liggia, G. liegen, to lie, to lay oneself down. The first of the two seems the original form, with the sense of thrusting, casting, striking. Sw. lægge pa en, to lay on, to strike; ON. hoggva och leggia, to strike and thrust; lag af kesio, a thrust with a javelin; Sw. lægga til lands, to reach the shore; lægga sig, to lie down.
In the same way Lat. jacere, to cast; jacere, to lie.

Lazar.—Lazaretto. Lazar, a leper, from Lazarus in the parable. Du. Lazarus-haus, a lazaretto, hospital for lepers, pest-house.

Lazy. Bav. laz, slow, late; Du. losig, leusig, flaccid, languid, slack, lazy—Kil.; Pl.D. losig, lesig, loose in texture, slow, weary; G. lass, slack, slow, dull.

Lea. See Lay.

To Leach. In carving, to cut up. Fr. lesche, a long slice or shive of bread.—Cot. Lechette, lisquette, a tongue of land, morsel to eat.—Roquef. Leche, liche, liquette, lisquette, a morsel.—Pat. de Champ. Properly a tongue, from lescher, to lick, as G. lecker, the tongue of cattle, from lecken.

Lead. Du. lood, loot.

To Lead. ON. leida, to lead; leid, track, way; at snua á leid, to turn on his traces, to turn back. The Goth. laiþan, ON. liða, to move on, go, pass, would seem to be a derivative, related to leida, as jacere, to lie, to jacere, to cast, or as G. liegen, E. to lie, to G. legen, E. to lay.

Leaf. G. laub, Du. loof, loove, the leaves of trees. The radical meaning seems something flat. Magy. lap, the leaf of a book; Lith. lapas, a leaf; la-palka, the shoulder-blade.

League. 1. Mid.Lat. leuca, Fr. lieue, a measure of distances, properly the stone which marked such a distance on the public roads. 'Mensuras viarum, nos miliaria, Græci stadia, Galli leucas.'—Isidore in Dief. Celtica. Gael. leug, leag, a stone; liagan, an obelisk; W. llech, a stone.
2. Fr. ligue. It. legua, an alliance, from Lat. ligare, to bind.

Leaguer. 1. Du. leger, a lying, lying-place; the lair of cattle, lying-place of an army in the field; belegeren, to beleaguer or pitch one's camp for the attack of a fortress; whence leaguer, a siege, having essentially the same meaning with the word siege itself, which signifies the seat taken by an army before a town for the same purpose.
2. A small cask. G. legger, wasser-legger, Sw. watten-leggare, water-cask in a ship. Probably from ON. lögg, N. logg, pl. legger, Sw. lagg, the rim of the staves of which a cask is made; lagga, to set staves together; lagger, laggbindare, a cooper; ON. lagg-wið, wood for cask-making.

Leak. Du. lekken, water to penetrate, to drip; lekwijn, wine that leaks from a cask; lekzak, a bag for straining. The radical meaning seems, to drip. Lith. laszas, a drop; laszėti, to drip, to leak.
E. latch-pan, a dripping-pan; latch, leech, a vessel pierced with holes for making lye; leach-troughs, troughs in which salt is set to drain; leeks, drainings; to leek off, to drain, and hence to leek on or latch on, to add fresh water after the first wort has been drawn off in brewing.—Hal.
Sw. bjork-laka, the juice of birch-trees; sal-laka, brine; laka pa, as E. to leek, or latch on in brewing. The same root is seen in Lat. liquo, to strain, filter, melt; liquatum vinum, strained wine; liquari.

to melt away; liquor (as Sw. laka), juice, liquid.
Leam. A parallel form with gleam. ON. ljomi, splendour; ljoma, to shine. Glemyn or lemyn as fyr, flammo;—as light, radio.—Pr. Pm.
Here, as in so many other cases, we are able to trace the designation of phenomena of sight after those of hearing. ON. hljomr, resonantia, clamor; N. ljom, re-sonance, echo; AS. hlemman, to crackle as flame; hlem, a sound.
Lean. AS. hlæne, læne, Pl.D. leen, slender, frail, lean; It. leno, lean, meagre, faint, feeble, also leaning towards, easily credulous, and yielding to fair words.—Fl. The radical signification seems to be what leans from the want of sufficient substance to keep it upright, hence feeble, thin, spare in flesh.
To Lean. AS. hlynian, Du. leunen, G. lehnen, Dan. læne, It. lenare, to lean, to bend towards. Russ. klonit', to bow down; klonishsya, to slope, incline, tend to; Gael, claon, incline, go aside, squint; claointe, bent, sloping; Gr. κλίνω, to make to bend, turn towards, turn aside; Lat. clino (in composition), to bend towards.
To Leap. ON. hlaupa, to run, spring; hleypa, to make to spring, to shoot for-wards; hlaupast, to escape, elope; G. laufen, to run.
Leap-year. ON. hlaup-ár, the inter-calary year which leaps forwards one day in the month of February. The Du. schrikkel-jaer has a similar meaning, from schrikken, to spring or stride; schrik-schoen, skaits.
To Learn. Goth. leisan, to know; laisyan, AS. læran, Sw. lära, G. lehren, to teach; Du. leeren, to teach, to learn; AS. leornjan, G. lernen, to learn. OHG. léra, AS. lari, E. lore, learning. Goth. laisa-reis, a teacher.
Lease. Fr. lais, laisseinent, the lease or instrument by which a holding of any kind is let to a tenant, or given into his hands to turn to profit. The lessor and lessee are the persons who give and accept the lease respectively. Fr. laisser, G. las-sen, to let; lass-gut, lass-hain, a farm or wood let for a period at a certain rent. Bav. verlassen einem etwas, to let some-thing to one on lease.
To Lease. To glean. Goth. lisan, las, lesun, to gather; Lith. lesti, to peck as a bird, to pick up.
*Leash. Mid.Lat. laxa, Fr. laisse, lesse, a leash to hold a dog, a bridle or false rein to hold a horse by, any such long string. Mid.Lat. laxamina, habena—
Gl. Isidor. From laxo, Fr. laisser, to let go. Bav. geläss, a noose for catching birds.
Not to be confounded with Fr. lacqs. It. laccio, Sp. lazo, a slip-knot, snare, tie.
Leasing. OE. lies. Goth. laus, emp-ty, vain; lausavaurds, an idle talker; N. lös, loose, lascivious, shameful; AS. leas, empty, false; leasian, to lie, leasere, a liar; Du. loos, pretence, false sham; looze wapenkriet, a false alarm; loose deur, a false door.
Least. See Less.
Leat of a Mill. From G. leiten, to lead. Das wasser in einen garten leiten, to convey water into a garden. Einen Fluss anders wohin leiten, to turn the course of a river; wasser-leitung, aque-duct, conduit, canal. See Lade.
Leather. G. leder, W. llethr, Du. leder, leer, Bret. ler.
To Leather. In familiar language, to thrash or beat one; and Swab. ledern is used in the same sense. So we speak of giving one a good hiding, as if it were meant as a dressing of his hide or skin, and similar expressions were current in Latin. Corium perdere,—redimere, to suffer blows,—forisfacere, to deserve them.
Leave. Permission. AS. leaf, geleaf, Pl.D. lof, love, ON. lof, permission; lofa, leyfa, G. erlauben, AS. lyfan, alyfan, to permit. The radical meaning, as shown under Believe, is applaud, approve, and in a weaker degree, allow, permit.
To Leave. Goth. laiba, AS. laf, ON. leifar (pl.), Gr. λοιπός, leavings, overplus, remainder; ON. leifa, Gr. λείπειν, λιμπά-νειν, to leave; Goth. aflifnan, Sw. blifwa, G. bleiben, to remain. Carinthian läpen, to leave remaining; lapach, remnants.
Leaven. Fr. levain, the sour-dough or ferment which makes the mass pre-pared for bread rise in a spongy form; from lever, Lat. levare, to rise.
Lechery.—Lickorous. From Fr. les-cher, lecher, to lick, were formed lescheur, lechereau, a lapper up of, a lickdish, slap-sauce, lickorous companion.—Cot. Lé-cherie, gourmandise.—Dict. de Berri. From G. lecken, to lick, lecker, dainty, lickerish, nice in food; in familiar lan-guage, a lively degree of a sensual desire. Der lecker steht ihm darnach, his chaps water at it, he has a letch or latch for it, as it would be expressed in vulgar E. Latch, a fancy or wish.—Hal. E. lickerish, lickorous, dainty. Lat. ligurire, to lick, to be dainty in eating, eagerly to long for.

The gratification of the palate was then taken as the type of other sensual pleasures, and G. leckerer is not only a dainty-mouthed man, but in a wider sense one who makes the gratifying of his appetites his chief business.—Kütn. OFr. lécheor, lecherres, lescheur, glutton, epicure, one given to the pleasures of the table or the flesh, adulterer, loose companion. The E. lechery has become exclusively appropriated to the applied sense, while in France lécherie, as we have seen, provincially retains the original meaning. The same train of thought which produced the change of meaning in lechery led in the middle ages to the use of Lat. luxus, luxuria (classically signifying excess in eating and drinking), in the sense of fleshly indulgence; luxus, böse Lust; luxuriosus, Horentreiber. — Dief. Supp. 'Oncques n'orent compagnie ne atouchement de carnelle luxure.'—St Graal, c. xxix. 152. In the E. translation—'nether in weye of lecherie lay hire by.' And probably this use of luxuria in the sense of lechery may justify the conjecture that luxus in the primary meaning of 'excess in the pleasures of taste has the same origin with G. lecker, E. lickorous, and Fr. lécherie, in a representation of the sound made by smacking the tongue and lips in the enjoyment of food. The Gr. γλυκύς, and Lat. dulcis (for dlucis), sweet, seem to show that the sound of a smack was represented by the syllable gluck or dluck, which when softened down to luck would supply the root of luxus. See Luck.
-lect.—Lecture. Lat. lego, lectum, to pick, gather, thence to read. Hence Elect, to choose from; Collect, to gather together; Select, to pick out and lay apart.
Lede. A kettle.
And Ananias fell down dede As black as any lede.—Manuel der Péchés.
Ir. luchd, a pot or kettle.
Drum-slede, a kettle-drum.—Fl. in v. nacchere.
Leden. Speech, language.
The queinte ring Thurgh which she understood well everything That any fowle may in his leden sing.—Chaucer.
From AS. lyden, leden, Latin, the Latin speech, then language in general. Of Ledene on Englisc, from Latin into E. He cuthe be dale Lyden understanden, he could partly understand Latin. — Pref. Hept. Mara is on ure lyden, biternes, Mara in our language is bitterness. The same application has taken place in It., where latino is used for language.

E cantin gli augelli ogni in suo latino.—Dante.
Fr. latinier, an interpreter.
The foregoing explanation would never have been questioned if it were not for the use of leid or lede in the same sense as leden. Ilk land has its ain leid.—Sc. prov. Translait of new thay may be red and song Ouer Albion ile into your vulgare lede, D. V. in Jam.
ON. hljóð, a sound, the sound of the voice; hljóða til, to address one; hljóða, Sw. lyda, to signify. Huru lydde brefvet? what did the letter import? Lagen lyder så, so the law says. Låte, cry, voice. Foglar hafva olika låten, fowls have different notes.
Ledge. A narrow strip standing out from a flat surface, as a ledge of rock, the ledge of a table. ON. lögg, Sw. lägg, Sc. laggen, the projecting rim at the bottom of a cask. Ledgings, the parapets of a bridge.—Jam.
Ledger. A leiger or ledger ambassador was a resident appointed to guard the interests of his master at a foreign court.
Now gentlemen imagine that young Cromwell's in Antwerp, leiger for the English merchants.— Lord Cromwell in Nares.
Return not thou, but leigeir stay behind And move the Greekish prince to send us aid.
Fairfax Tasso, ibid.
The term was also applied to other cases in which an object lies permanently in a place. A ledger-bait in fishing is one 'fixed or made to rest in one certain place when you shall be absent from it.'—Walton.
It happened that a stage-player borrowed a rusty musket which had lien long leger in his shop.—Fuller in R.
Hence leiger-books are books that lie permanently in a certain place to which they relate. 'Many leiger-books of the monasteries are still remaining, wherein they registered all their leases.'—H. Warton in R.
In modern book-keeping the term ledger is applied to what the Fr. call the grand livre, the principal book of account.
The origin is Du. legger, he who lies or remains permanently in a certain place, the supercargo, or person appointed to look after the interest of the owners of the cargo in a ship, their leiger-ambassador in that respect; also an old shop-keeper, a book that does not get sold.
Lee. Shelter. Lee-side, lijebord, the sheltered side of the ship. Lee-shore, the shore opposite the lee-side of the ship, and consequently the shore exposed to the wind. AS. hleo, hleow, shade, shelter. ON. hlifa, hlja, N. liva, to protect, shelter; ON. hlif, a shield (Lat. clypeus), defensive armour. Du. luw, shelter from the wind. Het begint te luwen, the wind abates. Dat luwt wat, that gives some relief. Luwte, AS. hleowth, place sheltered from the wind, apricitas. Hence Sc. lythe, shelter, and met. encouragement, favour. The lythe side of the hill. Possibly the radical image may be shown in ON. hlíð, side, slope of a hill.

Leech. A physician, healer, then the blood-sucking mollusk used for medicinal purposes. ON. læknir, Goth. leikeis, lekeis, a leech, leikinon, to heal; Boh. lek, medicine; leciti. Fin. lääketa, Gael. leighis, to heal.

We are inclined in the first instance to suppose that the notion of curative efforts may be taken from the type of an animal licking his wounds; Gr. λείχειν, Goth. laigon, Gael. ligh, to lick. But it is more likely that the radical idea is the application of medicinal herbs. Esthon. rohhi, grass, herb, potherb, medicine; rohhitsema, to apply medicaments. Lettish sahle, grass, herb; sahles (pl.), medicine, sahligs, medicinal. Bret. louzou, lizeu, pot or medicinal herbs; louzaoui, to use medicaments, dress a wound; louzaouer, lizeuour, a herborist, mediciner. W. llysiau, herbs; llyseua, to collect herbs. Manx lhuss, leeks, lentils, herbs; lus-thie, houseleek. The final s exchanges for a k (which is probably the older form) in Russ. Bohem. luk, G. lauch, ON. laukr, E. leek, potherb, onion, whence in all probability the lock or lick, G. luege, which forms the termination of many of our names for plants; hemlock, charlock, garlick, houseleek, Swiss wegluege, wild endive; kornluege, galeopsis ladanum.

It is to be remarked that houseleek was cultivated as a vulnerary. Gael. luibh, luigh, herb, plant.

Leek. See last article.

To Leer. See To Lour.

Lees. Fr. lie, sediment of wine; Lang. ligo, sediment, dregs, mud. Wall. lize, Namur lige, yeast. Bret. lec'hid, sediment, from lec'hia, to lay, to set down. W. llaid, mire.

Leet. G. lasse, lass-bauer, the name given in many parts of G. to tenants subject to certain rents and duties. Lass-bank, the court of the lassi, court leet; Lass-schopfen, leet-jury. Du. laet, a peasant tenant, subject of a certain jurisdiction; laet-banke, the court of the tenants, court-leet. In England court-leet is the court of the copyhold tenants, opposed to court-baron, that of the freeholders of a manor, copyhold being a servile tenure. See Lad.

Left. Du. lucht, luft, Lat. lævus, Pol., Boh. lewy. Perhaps the light hand, in opposition to the stronger, heavier right; AS. swithre, the stronger, the right hand. In Transylvania licht is used for schlecht, poor, slight. Fris. lichte lioeden, the common people. Boh. lewiti, to slacken; lewny, light, moderate.

Leg. ON. leggr, a stalk or stem; ann-leggr, the upper joint of the arm; hand-leggr, the forearm; gras-leggr, a stalk of grass.

Legacy.—Legate. Lat. legare, to depute, to assign, to bequeath by will.

Legal.—Legislate.—Legitimate. Lat. lex, legis, law.

Legend.—Legible. Lat. legendus, p.pcpl. fut. of lego, I read. See -lect.

Leguminous. Lat. legumen, pulse, as pease and beans. Explained from lego, to gather, as being gathered by hand.

Leisure. Fr. loisir, from Lat. licere, as plaisir from placere.—Diez. Prov. lezer, lezor, leisure, permission, opportunity. OFr. leist, loist, licet, it is permitted, it is lawful.

Leman. A mistress, for lefman, from AS. leof, loved, dear, as woman for wif-man.

Thys mayde hym payde suythe wel, myd god wille he hire nom And huld hyre as a lefmon.—R. G. 344.

To Lend.—Loan. ON. ljá, Goth. leihvan, G. lehen to lend money at interest; lehen, a fee, or estate given in respect of military service; ON. lán, Dan. laan, a loan, thing lent; OHG. lehanon, G. lehnen, Sw. låna, to loan or lend.

Length. See Long.

Lenient.—Lenitive. Lat. lenis, mild, soft, gentle. ON. linr, Sw. len, lin, Da. lind, G. linde, gelinde, soft, gentle, pliable.

Lent. AS. lengten, lencten, lanten, Du. lente, OHG. langez, lenzo, lenzen, G. lenz. Swab. glentz, Sw. ladig, lading, laing, laig, spring.

Leopard. Lat. Leopardus; supposed by Pliny to be the issue of a she lion (leæna) by a male panther (pardus).

Leper. Gr. λεπρός, scaly; the skin becoming scaly on those afflicted with the leprosy; λέπις, a scale, husk, peel.

Lepidoptera. Gr. λεπίς, λεπίδος, a scale, and πτερόν, a wing.

Lesion. Lat. lædo, læsum, to hurt, injure.

Less.—Least. In all kinds of action the idea of relaxation is identical with that of diminution. We say indifferently, his zeal never for a moment relaxed, or never grew less ; Lat. remittere is explained by Andrews to loosen, slacken, relax, and also to abate, decrease ; as slack by Richardson, relaxed, weakened, diminished. The sinking of the waters is expressed in Genesis by decrease, in Chaucer by aslake, or slacken

The water shall aslake and gone away Aboutin prime on the nexte day.

Now the root lass is widely spread in the sense of loose, slack. It. lasso, weary, faint ; Fr. lasche, slack, flagging, faint ; W. llaes, Bav. lass, OE. lash, slack, loose. And in OE. less was written lass; the lasse Bretaine.—R. G. 96. To lass, less, or liss are constantly used in such a manner that they may be explained with equal propriety to slacken or to diminish, to grow or make less.

The day is gone, the moneth passid, Hire love encreaseth and his lassetb.

His love slackens, grows weak, or becomes less. ' For their strength dayly lassed.'—Froissart in R. In the following passage the abstract idea of diminution is more distinct.

So that his owen pris he lasseth When he such measure overpasseth.

In the application to pain it is commonly written less or liss.

But love consent another tide That onis I may touch and kiss, I trow my pain shall never liss.—R. R. —shall never slacken or abate.

And thus with joy and hope well for to fare Arcite goth home lessid of his care ;

—i. e. with his care abated or diminished. G. leschen, to slake, to abate the strength of, and thence to extinguish fire.

Like a man that hurt is sore And is somdele of aking of his wound Ylessid well, but heled no dele more.

Chaucer in R. When less had thus acquired the sense of feebler, smaller, in weaker degree, a superlative was formed in analogy with most, best. Lest in the sense of Lat. quo minus, to the end that not, was originally less.

But yet lesse thou do worse, take a wife.

Chaucer.—i. e. in abating or slackening the tendency to do worse.

2.—The termination less in hopeless, restless, and the like, is G. los, loose, free ; los-binden ein pferd, to untie a horse, to set him loose. Nun bin ich von ihm los, now I am free of him ; namenlos, rastlos, without a name, without rest.

Lessee. See Lease.

Lesson. Lat. lectio, the act of reading (lego, I read), whence Fr. leçon, Prov. leisso, lesso.

To Let. To let is used in two senses apparently the reverse of each other, viz. 1st, to allow, permit, or even take measures for the execution of a purpose, as when we say let me alone, let me go, let me hear to-morrow ; and, 2nd, to hinder, as in the phrase without let or hindrance.

The idea of slackening lies at the root of both applications of the term. When we speak of letting one go, letting him do something, we conceive him as previously restrained by a band, the loosening or slackening of which will permit the execution of the act in question. Thus Lat. laxare, to slacken, was used in later times in the sense of its modern derivatives. It. lasciare, Fr. laisser, to let. Laxas desiccare, let it dry ; modicum laxa stare, let it stand a little while.—Muratori, Diss. 24, p. 365. So from Bav. lass, loose, slack, slow, G. lassen, to permit, to let.

The analogue of Bav. lass is ON. latr, lazy, torpid, slow, the original meaning of which (as observed under Late) was doubtless slack, whence E. let, to slacken (some restraining agency), to permit.

At other times the slackness is attributed to the agent himself, when let acquires the sense of being slack in action, delaying or omitting to do.

And down he goth, no lenger would he let. And with that word his counter door he shet.

Chaucer. The Duke of Parma is ill and will not let to send daily to the Duke of Medina Sidonia.—Drake to Walsingham in Motley.

Da. lade, to let, to permit or suffer something to be done ; also to omit ; lade af, to leave off. Goth. latjan, galatjan, to delay.

Then in a causative sense, to let one from doing a thing, is to make him let or omit to do it, to hinder his doing it.

Bav. laz, late ; letzen, to retard, impede, hinder.

Lethargic. — Lethe. Gr. λήθη, oblivion, whence ληθαργος (αργος, inactive), ληθαργικος, drowsy, forgetful.

Letter.—Literal.—Literature. Lat. littera, whence Fr. lettre, letter.

Lettuce. Lat. lactuca, Fr. laitue, doubtless from the milky juice.

To Levant. To run away from debt. Sp. levantar, to raise; levantar el campo, as Fr. lever le piquet, to decamp.
Levee. See Levy.
Level. Lat. libella (dim. of libra, a balance, also used in the sense of a plummet), It. livella, a plummet. 'Locus qui est ad libellam æquus.'—Varro. The OFr. livel, liveau, while in modern niveau, as well as in It. nivello, the initial l has been exchanged for an n. Level, rewle, perpendiculum.—Pr. Pm. Levell, a ruler, niveau.—Palsgr.
Lever. Fr. levier, an instrument for raising weights, from lever, to raise.
Leveret. Lat. lepus. It. lepore, Fr. lièvre, a hare; It. lepretto, a leveret or young hare; Fr. levreter, a hare to have young; levreteau, levrault, a leveret.
Levesell.—Lessel. A shed, gallery, portico.
He looketh up and doun till he hath found The clerkes hors, there as he stood ybound Behind the mille, under a levesell.—Reve's tale.
The gay levesell at the taverne is signe of the wine that is in cellar.—Parson's tale.
The original sense is a shade of green branches; G. laube, Pl.D. löve (from laub, foliage), an arbour, hut, gallery, portico. Dan. løvsal, Sw. löfsal, a hut of green branches; Dan. løvsals-fest, the feast of tabernacles. The termination sal is frequently used in G. to form substantives from verbs; trübsal, tribulation; schicksal, lot; scheusal, an object of aversion, &c.
Levigate. Lat. levigare or lævigare, to make smooth, from lævis, smooth, polished.
Levin. Lightning. 'Fulgur, leuenynge that brenneth.'—Ortus. 'To levyne or to smyte with lewenynge.'—Cath. Ang. 'Fulgur, fulmen, lewenynges; fulgurat, (it) lewnes:—MS. Vocab. in Way.
It is evidently identical with N. ljon, ljun, Dan. lyn, lynild, Sw. dial. lygna, lyvna, 'lightning, a flash of lightning. The proper meaning of the word seems flash; lynende öine, flashing eyes. Fabian in describing a comet says that 'out of the East part appeared a great levin or beam of brightness, which stretched toward the said star.'—Way in v. So many words connected with the idea of shining are found with initial gl as well as a simple l, that we may probably connect lewen or levin with Sc. gleuin, to glow.
So that the cave did gleuin of the hete.—D. V.
But N. lygne, to lighten, seems the older form; OSw. lygn-eld, lygnn-eld, ODan. lugn-eld, lightning.
Levity, -levi-. Lat. levis, light, trifling, vain; allevio, to make light.
Levy.—Levee, -lev-.—Levant. Fr. lever, to lift, raise, set up, also to levy, collect, gather.—Cot. The E. levy is from the form levée, the act of raising or gathering. Levée de soldats, a levy of soldiers;—des impôts, a levy of taxes. The Scotch say to lift a debt, to obtain payment, to get it in. Se lever, to rise or get up; le lever du roi, the attendance of the French courtiers on the getting up of the King. Hence E. levee, a complimentary attendance of guests on a person in authority. From the ppl. pr. levant, the rising of the sun, we have the Levant, the region of the East, specially applied to the countries under the dominion of the Turk. Lat. levo, to raise, is undoubtedly connected with levis, light. See To Lift. Elevo, to raise up, to elevate.
Lewd. Originally illiterate, untaught, as opposed to the educated clergy; then, inferior, bad, wicked, lustful. AS. læwd, læwed, laicus.—Bede 5. 6. 13. 14. Læwede man, laicus homo.—Ælfric. Gram. 'Ægther ge preosthades, ge munuchades menn and that læwede folc:' as well the men of the priesthood and monkhood as the lay people.—Lye.
From lead, people; OFris. lioed, liued, men, people, common people; lichte lioeden, the laity. Liudamon, liodamon, man of the people. Russ. liodi, the people; liodin, liodyanin, a secular person.
Lewde, not letteryd, illiteratus;—unknowynge in what so hyt be, inscius, ignarus.—Pr. Pm. Leude of condycions, maluays, villayn, maugraneux.—Palsgr. Leude or naughty wine, illaudatum vel spurcum.—Horman in Way.
Lexicon. Gr. Λεξικὸν, from λέξις, a word; λέγω, I speak.
Liable. Commonly explained from Lat. ligo, Fr. lier, to bind; under obligation to. But no Lat. ligabilis or Fr. liable is brought forwards. The word seems purely English, and it looks as if it were barbarously formed from the verb to lie as inclinable from incline, with the sense of lying open to.
Libel.—Library. Lat. liber, a book, whence libellus, a little book, famosus libellus, a scandalous publication; librarium, a chest or place to keep books in.
Liberal.—Liberate.—Liberty. Lat. liber, free.

Libertine. Lat. libertinus, a freed man, Fr. libertin, a dissolute person, one freed from moral restraint.
License, -licit. Lat. liceo, licitum, to be lawful, whence licentia, permission to do a thing, unrestrained action. Illicit, unlawful.
Lich. Lich-gate, the gate where the corpse is set down on entering a church-yard to await the arrival of the minister. Lich-wake, the watch held over a dead body. Goth. leik, G. leiche, AS. lic, lice, corpse.
To Lick. 1. G. lecken, Goth. laigon, Gr. λείχω, It. leccare, Lith. lakti. Fin. lakkia, Russ. lokat', to lick or lap, to sup up liquids with the tongue. Pers. laq-kerden, literally to make laq, to do what is characterised by the sound laq, shows the imitative character of the word in the clearest light.
2. To beat. W. llach, a slap; llachio, to slap, to thresh; llachbren, a cudgel.
Licorous. See Lechery.
* Lid. AS. hlid, gehlid, a covering, door. In the AS. Gospel, Matt. xxvii. 60, it is said that Joseph rolled a great stone for a hlid to the sepulchre. OHG. hlit, lid, covering; uparlid, covering, the mercy-seat (which covered the ark). Pl.D. lid, cover; ogenlid, G. augenlied, eyelid. OFris. hlid, lith, covering, roof; 'mit ene plonckene hlide:' [a well] with a covering of planks. The foregoing would be satisfactorily accounted for from AS. hlidan, behlidan, to cover, close, OFris. hlidia (Stürenberg), to cover, but the ON. seems to indicate that the primary sense is an opening, then what closes it up, in the same way that the primary sense both of door and of gate seems to be an opening or passage. ON. hlid, a vacant space, an opening, gap in a hedge, dyke or wall closed with a hatch or gate. It is applied to the vacant space on a wall where one of a row of shields has been taken down, to a pause in a battle. Gardshlid, opening in an inclosure, gate, wicket. Da., Sw. led, wicket, gate, barrier.
To Lie. 1. Goth. ligan, lag, legum, to lie; lagjan, to lay; Fris. liga, lidsa, lidisa, lizze, to lie; Russ. lojii (Fr. j), to lay; lojitsya, to lie down. Lat. legere, to lay, as appears from colligere, to lay together, to collect. Gr. λέγειν, originally to lay, then to lay to sleep; λέγεσθαι, to lie, λέχος, a couch, bed. Serv. lojati, to lay; legati, to lie. ON. leggia, to lay; leggjast, to lie. See Lay.
2. Goth. liugan, G. lügen, Slavon. lügati, Pol. lgać. Boh. hlati, to lie. OHG. lougen, lougnen, negation, falsehood; OS. lognian, AS. lygnian, to deny, Lett. leegt, to deny, refuse. So in Gael. breug, a lie; breugaich, give the lie, gainsay. The fundamental meaning of a lie is vain idle talk, and to deny or refuse is to make the speaker talk in vain. Gael. leog, idle talk; leogair, trifler; Ir. liogam (as Gael. breug), to flatter. In a Vocab. A.D. 1470, cited by Adelung, loggen is translated nuga, derisio. The origin seems preserved in the Finnish languages, where Fin. liika, Esthon. liig signify by, beside, beyond what is natural or right. Esthon. jominne, drink; liig-jominne, drunkenness; juus, hair, liig-juus, false-hair, a wig; nimmi, a name, liig-nimmi, a nick-name, surname; te, a way, liig-te, wrong way, by-path; and pajatus, speech, liig-pajatus, falsehood, trifling. Bret. gaou, awry, wrong, false, gaolavarout, to lie.
Lief.—Liever. As lief, as soon; liefer or liever, rather. Du. lief, dear, pleasing, acceptable; dat is mij lief, I am glad of it; lief hebben, to love. See Love.
Liege.—Allegiance. The Mid.Lat. litgius, ligius, Prov. litge, lige, Fr. lige, was a term of the feudal law, signifying the absolute nature of the duty of a tenant to his lord. Liegeman, a tenant who owes absolute fidelity; liege-lord, the lord entitled to claim such from his tenant. Mid.Lat. litgancia, ligiantia, ligeitas, &c., allegiance, the duty of a subject to his lord. The notion that the word was derived from Lat. ligare, signifying the tie by which the subject was bound to his lord, appears very early, but is not entitled to more respect on that account. The derivation adopted by Duc. is far more satisfactory; from litus, lidus, ledus, a man of a condition between a free man and a serf, bound to the soil, and owing certain work and services to his lord. Litimonium, lidimonium, litidium, the duty of a litus to his lord. See Lad.
Lien. An arrangement by which a certain property is bound to make good a pecuniary claim. Fr. lien, from Lat. ligamen, tie. See Limehound.
Lieutenant. One holding the place of another. Fr. lieu, place, and tenir, to hold.
Life.—Live. Goth. liban, G. leben, to live; leib, body. Du. lijf body, life.
Lift. OE. lift, hlift, the sky, air.
Tho hurde he thulke tyme angles synge ywis, Up in the lufte a murye song.—R. G. 280.

Goth. luftus, the air ; Pl.D. lucht, lugt, Du. lucht, locht, air, sky, breath ; N. lukt, ON. lopt, air, sky.
Pl.D. lucht signifies light as well as air, and the enjoyment of the two are so intimately connected that we can hardly doubt the identity of lucht, light, with lucht, lugt, luft, air ; and must suppose that luft has arisen from lucht by the same tendency to soften aspirates which is seen in the pronunciation of cough, as compared with the spelling, or in E. soft, compared with G. sacht. The absence of light and air is expressed in Du. by the same word bedompt, signifying dark, obscure, and also close, stifling.—Bomhoff. Gr. αἴθω, to light up, blaze ; αἰθήρ, the lift, sky.
To Lift. Pl.D. lüften, lichten, to raise into the lift (Pl.D. lucht, OE. luft) or air.
Lüften is also used in the sense of giving air. ON. lopt, air, sky ; á lopt, up in the air, aloft ; lopta, Dan. löfte, to raise or lift. Swab. lupf, a breathing, moment of breath-taking (comp. Pl.D. lucht halen, to draw breath) ; lupfen, to lift ; AS. hlifian, to rise up, to raise or lift.
It must be admitted that the idea of lifting may also be explained as making a thing light, making it rise upwards, and the verb seems often to be formed in this manner. Thus from Lat. levis, light, levare, to lift ; from Bohem. lehky, light, lehciti, to lift. The Pl.D. lichten may be formed either from lucht, the air, or from licht, light, and it is used as well in the sense of lift as of that of lighten; die anker lichten, to weigh or raise the anchor ; ein schiff lichten, to lighten a ship, to take out the cargo ; die casse lichten, to take money out of the chest, an application which may be compared with E. shop-lifting, removing goods clandestinely from a shop, or Sc. to lift a debt, perhaps to empty or make void the debt, to receive the money. Lower Rhine löfte, to steal, Goth. hliftus, a thief, hlifan, to steal, may be connected with AS. hlifian, to raise, by Fr. enlever, to take away.
Dan. let, light, not heavy, lette, to lighten, to lift, to weigh anchor.
The vacillation in the apparent derivation of all these words may be explained by the ultimate identity of the parent stocks. Lightness is a tendency upwards, towards the light and air. To make a thing light (in the sense of not heavy) is to bring it towards the light, or, what is radically the same word, towards the lift or air. It must be remembered that the final t, which is lost in AS. hlifian, Bav. lupfen, Lat. levare, as compared with lift, is no essential part of the root of light.

Ligament.—Ligature. Lat. ligare, to bind, tie.
Light. I. Goth. liuhath, light ; lauhmoni, lightning ; G. licht, light ; ON. lios, Gael. leus, Lat. lux, light ; lucere, Bret. luc'ha, luia, Fr. luire, to shine ; W. llug, light ; llygad, the eye ; llugorn, Lat. lucerna, Gr. λύχνος, a light, lamp, &c. ; Bret. lugern, shine, brilliancy ; Gr. λευκός, white ; λύκη, the dawn ; Sanscr. luj, lok, loch, shine, see.
2. G. leicht, Du. licht, leycht, ON. lettr, Pol. lekki, Boh. lehky, Serv. lak, Russ. legok, Sanscr. laghu, Lat. levis, of small weight, easy. The Gr. ἐλαχύς, small, mean, is generally recognised as identical with levis, which it unites with the Slavonian forms.
As lightness is a tendency upwards towards the light and air, it may take its designation either from light (lux), or from Pl.D. lucht, the lift or air, words which have been shown to be radically identical. The air is the most common type of lightness, and it is besides the only thing which interposes no impediment to the passage of light. Thus lightness and light are naturally associated together ; heaviness and darkness. N. let, light (levis) ; letta (of the weather), to clear up, to become bright and uncovered. See Lift.
To Light.—Alight. The different senses of the verb to light afford a good instance of the intimate association in our mind between light and air. To light on a thing, to fall in with it, is to have light on it. I hope by this time the Lord may have blessed you to have light upon some of their ships. —Carlyle's Cromwell, 2. 384.
In the same way the native of New Holland to signify meeting with a thing says that it makes a light. 'Well me and Hougong go look out for duck ; aye, aye, Bel make a light duck.' Which rendered into English would be, 'We don't see any duck' [don't meet with or light on any].—Mrs Meredith, Australia.
In Pl.D. a similar idea is expressed by reference to the air. Het was as wen he uut der lucht full, it was as if he fell out of the lift or air ; of one who unexpectedly comes to light.
To alight from horseback, to light upon the ground, are probably to be understood from the notion of lightening the conveyance on which the agent was previously borne. Dan. let, light, not heavy ; lette.

to lift, up, to raise; at lette anker, to weigh anchor; at lette een af sadelen, to raise one from the saddle, to help him to alight.

Lighten.—Lightning. Goth. liu-hath, light ; liuhtjan, lauhatjan, to light-en ; lauhmoni, lightening ; G. licht, light, leuchten, to lighten ; W. llâg, light, lluch-ed, AS. liget, flash, lightning. So far lightning seems simply to be regarded as a flash of light, the type of brilliancy, but in other cases we meet again with that singular confusion of the ideas of light and sky or air, which has been observed under Lift and Light, and the phenome-non is regarded as sky-fire. N. lukt, air, sky, heavens ; luktmg, lightning ; ON. lopt, air, sky ; lopt-eldr, sky-fire, light-ning.

Lighten. Pl.D. lichten, to lift, to lighten. Ein schiff lichten or leichten, to lighten or unload a ship ; die kasse lich-ten, to take money out of the chest ; eine tonne l., to empty a cask ; die anker l., to weigh anchor.

Lights. G. die leichte leber (the light liver), the lungs, from their light spongy texture. Russ. legkij, light ; legkoe, the lungs.

Like. -ly. The Goth. termination leiks, equivalent to Gr. -λικοσ, Lat. -lis, G. -lich, and E. -ly, is used to indicate the nature, form, or appearance of a thing. Goth. galeiks, of common form, alike ; samaleiks (Lat. similis), of the same nature, like ; sildaleiks, wonderful ; sva-leiks, so-formed, Gr. τηλικοσ, Lat. talis, such ; hvileiks, πηλικοσ, qualis, how-formed, which.

The same element is preserved as a substantive word in Lap. lake, mode, manner. Kutte lakai, kutte laka, in what manner ? how ? Paha-laka, in bad manner, badly ; mainetes laka, blame-lessly. The addition of an adjectival termination produces a form, lakats (sometimes standing by itself), equivalent to Goth. -leiks or Lat. -lis. Tjaskeslakats, of cold nature, chilly ; kâlkoslakats, of slow nature, slowish ; aktalakats (akta, one), OHG. analih, AS. anlic, G. ähnlich, of one nature, equal, like ; Lap. tolakats, like thee, thine equal ; tannlakats, Lat. talis, like this ; mannlakats, qualis, like which. A remarkable approach to the Lap. form is preserved in the OE. lok, used in forming the comparative and superlative of adjectives in liche. Thus from grisliche, grisly, Robert of Glouces-ter forms grisloker, and in the same way we find hastilokest—R. G., lightloker, wikked-lokest.—P. P. In Finn, where the sound of k is frequently softened to that of y, the Lap. lake becomes lai, genus vel indoles rei, explaining Lat. -lis, G. -lei, and E. -ly. Fin. sillä lailla, in that manner. Niin on laini (-ni = meus), that is my habit. Mitälaija, of what kind ; kahtalaija, G. zweierlei, of two kinds. Esthon. luggo, lukko. condition, manner, thing.

The same element may be recognised in OE. leche, lœche, looks, countenance, likeness.

Lathlece lœches Heo leiteden mid egan.—Layamon Brut i. 80.—loathly looks they flashed with their eyes.

He—thas worde seide, Mid seorhfulle lœchen.—Ibid. i. 145.—with sorrowful looks.

He gealp that he wolde fleon On fugeles lœche.—Ibid. i. 122.—he boasted that he would fly in the image of a fowl.

Goth. manlicha, OHG. manalihho, AS. manlica, an image, representation of a man.

The course of development is probably look, countenance, appearance, form, mode of being. Pers. lika, facies, vultus, forma—Diefenbach ; Serv. lik, counte-nance, Russ. lichiko, little face, litze, the face, mien, person, agent.

In like manner from Lap. muoto, face, appearance, form, image, is formed muo-tok, like ; muotolas, likeness. Attje muotok, like his father, having the form of his father. In Fin. the same word con-veys the sense of Lat. modus, of which indeed it probably explains the origin ; niin modoin, in that manner ; monella modolla, in many manners. It then forms an adjectival termination, muotoinen (contracted to moinen), alicujus formæ, gestaltet, ähnlich, equivalent to Lap. lakats above-mentioned ; sen muotoinen or sem-moinen, of that nature (as from lai, sen-lainen, in the same sense) ; isansa muo-toinen (isä, father), like his father. So also from kuwa, form, figure, image, ku-wainen, resembling ; from hahmo, form, appearance, hahmoinen, resembling. The Lap. has also wuoke, form, figure, appear-ance, manner (perhaps from the same root with Gr. εικω, I seem, εικων, an image ; with the digamma Fεικω, Fεικων) ; tan wuokai, in this manner, as tan lakai above-mentioned. Hence wuokak, like, equal, and wuokok or wuokasats, as an adjectival termination equivalent to E. ly; piadnak-wuokasats, or piadnak-lakats, dog-like; akta-wuokok or akta-lakats, uniformis, æqualis.
To Like. N. lika, Lap. likot, to be to one's taste, to find to one's taste. N. Kor lika du dæ? how do you like it? Lap. Tat munji liko, that likes me well, it gratifies my taste. As the gratification of taste is the primary type of all enjoy- ment, it may be suspected that the root of our present word is the same repre- sentation of the smacking of the tongue which gives rise to E. licorous, licorish, dainty, given to the pleasures of taste. See Lechery. To like then, or it likes me, would be exactly equivalent to the G. schmecken. Wie schmeckt ihnen dieser wein? How do you like this wine? Diese antwort schmeckte ihm gar nicht, the answer was not to his liking. Swiss gschmoke, placere.—Idiot. Bernense. So in Du. monden, to please, from mond, the mouth. Dit antwoord mondde den koning niet; did not please the king.—Epkema in V. muwlckjen.
Lily. Lat. lilium, Gr. λείριον, OHG. lilja. The original sense of the word may probably be preserved in Esthon. lil, lillik, lilli. Alb. ljoulj, a flower; Basque lili, a flower, also to blossom. Mod.Gr. λουλούδι, a blossom; λουλου- δίζω, to flourish, bloom, blossom.
Limb. AS. lim, Da. lem, a joint of the body; ON. limr, branch, bough, limb. The word might plausibly be de- rived from the notion of joining. 'Loketh that ye beon euer mid onnesse of one herte ilimed together.'—Ancren Riwle, 256. Limunge, joining; unlimed, se- parated.—Ibid. The i however of ON. lim, glue, lime, is long; of limr, limb, short. See Lime.
The limb of the moon, in astronomy, is a different word, from It. lembo, skirt, border. See Limbo.
Limber. 1. WE. limbers, shafts. The limber of a gun is the shafts with their pair of wheels. In nautical language limbers are the rollers laid under a boat when it is drawn up on the beach. Fr. limon, shafts. See Linchpin.
Limber. 2.—Limp. The radical sig- nificance is the same as that of flabby, flaggy, or flaccid; not having strength to stand stiff, and so tending to flap upon itself, supple, pliant, W. llabio, to slap; llibin, llelpr, flaccid, drooping; ON. limp- iaz, to faint, become slack. Swiss lamp- en, to hang loose, to fade, to move in a spiritless manner; lampig, lampelig, faded, loose, flabby, hanging; gelamp, a loose trailing garment; lämmelen, to swag, hang loose as stockings ill-gar- tered; lampohr, langohr, a hanging ear; lämpen (G. lapperi), a flap, piece hanging loose, rag, dewlap of an ox; Swab. lumm, fagged; lummelig, lummerig, hanging down, having lost its stiffness; lumpf, spongy, soft; lummelen, lümpeln, limpeln, to act carelessly and indiffer- ently.
Limbo. A place in the outskirts of Hell in which the souls of the pious, who died before the time of Christ, were sup- posed to await his coming, and where the souls of unbaptised infants remain. 'Limbus ponitur pro quadam parte in- ferni, quatuor enim sunt loca inferni, scilicet infernus damnatorum, limbus puerorum, purgatorium, et limbus patrum.'—Joh. de Janua in Duc.
Then applied to a place of confine- ment, Fr. limbes, the purgatory of un- baptised children; also a low and un- savoury room in prisons.—Cot. In limbo, in prison. The origin is It. lembo, a lap or skirt of a garment, hem, border. See Limber 2.
Lime. 1. Anything used for sticking things together; hence applied to two very different substances, glue or bird- lime, and the calcareous earth used as cement in building. G. leim, Du. lijm, glue, any viscous substance which joins bodies together.—Kütn. ON. lim, glue; veggia-lim, wall-lime, lime, mortar. It is the same word with Lat. limus, slime, mud, E. loam, Du. leem, clay, terra ar- gillacea, lenta, tenax, glutinosa—Kil., and with slime, any viscous, semi-liquid, gluey material. 'Slime had they for mortar.'—Genesis. Esthon. libbe, smooth, slip- pery. Lith. limpu, lipti, to stick; lippus, sticky; Pol. lep, bird-lime, lepić, to glue, paste, mould, lipki, gluey; Boh. lipati, to stick, mould in clay; lepiti, to paste, glue, daub.
2. A lime-tree is so called from the glutinous juice of the young shoots. A bud or twig held in the mouth speedily becomes enveloped in jelly, and it pro- bably was used for boiling down to bird- lime. Pol. lep, bird-lime, lipa, lime-tree.
Limehound. A dog held in a leash, a greyhound. Fr. limier, a bloodhound or limehound.—Cot. From Lat. ligamen, a tie, OFr. liamet, a tie, a packet; Lang. liama, to tie up in a bundle; Piedm. liamet, a tape, little tie of riband; Milan. ligamm, Bret. liamm, band, tie; Grisons ligiar, liar, to bind; ligiom, liom, liam, a band.

Limit. Lat. limes, limitis, a bound, terminating point or line.
To Limn. Fr. enluminer, to illuminate, to sleek or burnish, also to limn; enlumineur de livres, one that coloureth or painteth upon paper, an alluminer.—Cot. ' Excellent—for the neatness of the handwriting, adorned with illumination, which we now call limning, in the margin.'—Wood, Fasti in R.

Limp. See Limber.
To Limp. Pl.D. lumpen, lulken, lulschen, to limp. Dan. lumpe, to limp, go lame. Fr. cloper, cloquer, clocher, to limp—Cot. ; clopin, qui marche difficilement.—Vocab. de Bray. Lith. klumbas, lame of one leg, limping ; klumbis, lame of one leg, a bungler ; klumboti, to limp ; klumbenti, G. klopfen, to knock at a door; klumpu, klupti, to stumble ; klumpas, a wooden shoe ; E. dial, clumpers, thick heavy shoes ; to clump, to tramp, to clunter, to walk clumsily.—Hal.

The fundamental image is the clumping gait of a lame man, consisting of a succession of knocks, represented by the Fr. clop, clok, in cloper, cloquer (softened to clocher) ; aller clopin-clopan, to go clop-clop, to limp. G. klopfen, to knock. The same relation is seen between E. clunch, a thump or blow (Hal.), and Sc. clinch, Lap. linkot, to limp; linkes, lame; Sw. lunk, jog-trot; lunka på, to jog on.

Limpid. Lat. limpidus, transparent, clear.

To Lin.—Blin. To cease ; properly to slacken? G. linde, Lat. lenis, soft.

Linchpin. Bav. lon-, lunnagel, loner, N. lunnstikke, Pol. lon, Bohem. launek, ODu. lunisa (Schm.), AS. lynis, Pl.D. lönse, lünse, lünsch, the peg that holds the wheel on the axle. ON. hlunnr, limbers, in nautical language, the bars of wood on which a boat is dragged ashore or supported when so dragged up ; hlummr, the handle of an oar. Gael, lunn, a spoke or lever, the shaft of an oar. OHG. lun, obex, paxillus ; lan, clavus in axe."—Gl. in Schm. Swab, lanne, land, shafts ; lander, a lath; G. geländer, bannisters. Mid.Lat. lonum, spoke of a wheel; limo (Fr. limon, shafts), a linch-pin.—Dief. Supp.

Line.—Lineage.—Lineament. Lat. linea, originally a linen thread or string, a fishing-line, then a line, track or trace, the line of descent from father to son, whence lineage, a line of ancestry; lineaments, the lines of the features; to delineate, to trace out.

To Line. Sw. dial. lina, to double a garment on the inside with linen, then with any other texture.

Linen. Lat. linum, G. lein, ON. lin, flax.

Ling. 1. N. laanga, Dan. længe, Du. linge, lenge, a kind of codfish.
2. A kind of heath. ON. ling, any small shrub, especially heath. N. blaabær-lyng, the bilberry plant.

Lingel. Two words seem confounded, of which the first signifies a little tongue or thong of leather (B.), from Lat. ligula, lingula, any tongue-shaped object, promontory, spatula, tenon. Fr. ligule, a little tongue, lingell, tenon.—Cot. Sc. langel, langet, linget, a tether; NE. langot, the latch of a shoe.—Grose.
In the second sense lingel is used for shoemaker's thread, from Fr. ligneul, shoemaker's thread, or a tatchingend.—Cot. 'Lingell that souters sew with, chefgros, lignier. Lynger, to sew with, poulcier.'—Palsgr. in Way. Lingel is still used in this sense in the north of England, and lingan in Scotland. See Laniard, Inkle.

Linger. G. verlängern, Du. lingen, verlangen, verlengen (Kil.), to lengthen out, to be long about a thing.

Lingey. Limber.—B. Bav. lunzig, soft, limber. See Loiter.

-lings. -long. -linges or longes, ling, long, were frequently used as an adverbial termination in the older stages of our language. AS. on bæcling, backward ; neadunga, -inga, OE. nedelingis, nedelonges, of necessity; darklings, in the dark ; grovelyngys or grovelynge (Pr. Pm.), face downwards. G. blindlings, blindly ; rücklings, backwards, rittlings, sitzlings, &c. The element has much resemblance to Sw. lunda, lonnom. Da. lundes, Goth. laud, in the expressions salunda, Goth. svalaud, in such wise ; sammalunda, Goth. samalaud, in the same way, Sw. dial. skakker lonnom, in shaking wise, as if one had a fever. The origin of these last is referred by Ihre to Goth. ludja, face, laudja, form. ON. lund, mind, disposition, will, mode, wise. A allar lundir, by all means; med lengom lundom, in nowise. Fin. luonto, form, disposition, nature ; W. llun, form, likeness, shape ; yn llyn, in this manner.

Linguist. Lat. lingua, the tongue, a language. There can be little doubt that lingua is from the same source with lingo, lictum, to lick, viz. from the smacking or clacking of the tongue in the enjoyment of food. See Delight.

Liniment. Lat. linimentum, from linio, to rub softly, to besmear.

Link. 1. ON. hlekkr. Da. lænke, a chain, fetter; hlekkjahund, Da. lænke-hund, a banddog; lænkeled (led, limb, joint), link of a chain. N. lækk, a ring, link, tether, especially one made of withy; lækkja, a chain. The radical image seems to be a crook or bending. Sw. dial. lynka, ON. lykkja, crook, bending, twist. G. lenken, to bend in a certain direction, to turn, to steer; lenksam, pliable, supple; gelenk, a joint. Lith. linkti, to bow, to turn; lenkti, to bend in a certain direction; linkes, bent; linkus, pliable. Fin. lenko, a bending, anything bent; lenkki, a hoop, withy band.

2. A torch of pitched rope or paper. Probably from Du. lonte or lompe, a gunner's match of twisted tow, by a change similar to that which we see in G. schrumpfen, E. shrink; G. sumpf, E. sump, sink. See Linstock.

Linnet. Fr. linotte, G. lein-finke, flachs-finke, from feeding on linseed, the seed of flax. It. linosa, flax-seed, a linnet.

Linstock. A short staff of wood split, which holds the match used by gunners in firing cannon.—B. Sw. luntstake, Du. lompe, lonte, a gunner's match, made like a loose rope of twisted flax or tow.—Kil. As lompe signifies also a rag, the name, as Ihre and Adelung suggest, is in all probability taken from the match having been made in the first instance of twisted rags. The form lonte may be a corruption of lompe, but it is by no means necessary to make that supposition. The term lompe, G. lumpe, lumpen, a rag, is from a root signifying fluttering or flapping, hanging loose, of which many modifications are given under Limber. Now this image is often represented by forms with a final d, nd, n, as well as by those with a final b, mb, m. Thus we have Du. slodderen, as well as slobberen, to flag or bag; slons, sluns, loose; Pl.D. slunten, slunnen, rags; sluntje, Du. slodde, slomp, a slut. Da. dial. lunte is used for a twisted band of straw, hay, or sedge, to bind sheaves or the like.

Lintel. Fr. linteau, Sp. lintel, dintèl, the head-piece of a door or window.—B. Probably from the form lon, lunn, or lund, signifying a timber, pole, or bar, mentioned under Linchpin.

Lion. Lat. leo, -nis; Gr. λέων.

Lip. Lat. labium, Gael. liob, liob, lib, Wall. lèpe, Sw. läppe, lip; Vulg. G. labbe. labbe, lip, mouth; Lith. lupa, lip; lupos (pl.), mouth; Zulu lebe, under-lip of animals; Amakosa umlebe, lip. From the sound made by the tongue and lips in lapping. Lat. lambere, W. lleipio, Bret. lipa, to lick; Sw. läppja, to lap; läppja på allt, to taste of every-thing. Fr. lippée, a mouthful; lippu, thick-lipped.

Liquid.—Liquor. Lat. liqueo, to melt, to flow.

Liquorice. It. lecurizia, Fr. reglisses, Gr. γλυκυρρίζα (γλυκύς, sweet, and ῥίζα, root).

-lision. -lide. Lat. lædo, læsum, in comp. -lido, to hurt, properly, as shown by the compounds, to strike. Hence Elision, from elido, to strike out; Collision, from collido, to strike together.

To Lisp. Du. lispen, lispelen, Sw. läspa, to lisp, speak imperfectly; G. flis-pern, flistern, to rustle, whisper.

To List.—Listless, AS. lystan, to have pleasure in, to raise desire, or give pleasure to. Me lyste, it pleaseth me. The lyst nu liotha, thou art now desirous of songs. Dan. lyste, to desire, take pleasure in. De kan faae hvad de lyster, you can take what you list. ON. lyst, pleasure, desire. Pl.D. lusten, gelüsten, to desire. Mi lustet ni'g meer, I have no more appetite. Dat luste ik ni'g, I do not like it, have no taste for it. G. lust, pleasure.

Listless is the condition of one who has no pleasure in his work, and therefore acts without energy.

Ainsi s'avancèrent de grand volonté tous chevaliers et ecuyers et prirent terre.—Froissart, 4. c. 18.

I haue nothing so good lust to my work as I had yesterday.—Palsgr.

List. It. lista, listra, any kind of list or selvedge, a guarding or border about any garment, [hence] the lists of tilting or tournaments, also a row, file, or rank of anything set in order.—Fl. G. leiste, a stripe or strip; Du. lijst, edge, border, margin, strip, catalogue. The It. liccia, lizza, list or selvedge of cloth (Fl.), lists of a tiltyard, Sp. liza, Fr. lices, lisse, the fence of a tiltyard, lisière, list of cloth, hem of a garment, outskirt of a wood, can hardly be distinct, though they seem to have come through a different channel from the forms with a final l, and may probably spring direct from a Celtic source, while the final l is a Teutonic modification of the same ultimate root.

Bret. Léz, haunch, border, skirt; lézen.

selvedge, list, border; lez, OFr. delez, beside, near ; W. ystlys, side, flank.
Dehors les murs a unes lices (a rampart) De bon mur fort a carneaux bas.—R. R.
Without the ditch were listes made With wall batailed large and drade. Ibid. Chaucer, 4200.

Listen. We might readily derive AS. hlystan, to listen, from ON. hlust, an ear ; at hlusta til, or at leggia hlustir við, to give ear to, to listen. But probably hlust, the ear, is so called as the organ of listen-ing. W. hlust, ear, Gr. κλύω, to hear. The probability is that the sense of listen is developed in a manner similar to that of hist! or hark! signifying in the first in-stance a low rustling sound, then the direction of the attention to catch or watch for such a sound. The Du. luys-teren signifies to whisper, and also to listen ; Pl.D. lustern, glustern, to listen. OHG. hlosen, AS. hlosnian, Bav. losen, lusen, lusnen, lustern, to listen. Swiss lisele, to speak in a low voice ; Carinthian lisen, to be still, to listen.—Deutsch. Mundart. AS. hlysa, hliosa, fame, glory, must originally have signified rumour, a buzzing sound.
In like manner ON. hljóð, ljóð, Da. lyd, sound, voice ; also silence, a hearing ; ON. hlyða, OE. lithe, to listen ; Da. lyde (to listen to), to obey. See To Lithe.

Litany. Gr. λιτανεία, a supplicating ; λιτή, prayer ; λίσσομαι, λίτομαι, to pray.

Lithe.—Lithe. Goth. lithus, AS. lith, Du. lid, G. glied, a joint, limb, bodily member. ON. liðr, a joint, knot ; N. lide, to bend the limbs ; liðig, what bends or moves with ease, pliable, convenient. E. lithy, lithe, lithesome, lissome, active, supple, pliant, gentle.

To Lithe. To relate, to listen.
Lystenith now to my talkynge Of whom I wyl you lythe.—MS. Hal.
And under lynde in a launde lenede I a stounde To lithen her laies and her loveliche notes. P.P.

ON. hljóð, sound, voice. I einu hljóði, with one voice. Hljóða or ljóða, to re-cite. The word was then elliptically used for an opportunity of speaking, si-lence, attention. At beiðaz hljóðs, to re-quest a hearing. Hence hlyða á, to listen.

Lither.—Luther. Loose in a moral sense, without energy, bad. G. liederlich, loose, disorderly in business or conduct. Ein liederlicher, schlotteriger mensch, a man negligent in dress, whose clothes hang loose and dangling. Liederlich ar-beiten, to work slightly, carelessly, slubber a thing over.

A clerk had litherly beset his while. But if he could a carpenter beguile.—Chaucer.
Luther laws, bad laws ; luther dede, wicked action.—R.G. Du. lodderen int bedde, in de sonne, to lie lazily in bed, to lounge in the sun. Lodder, a loose, lux-urious man ; lodderigh, lodderlick, scurrilis, luxuriosus, meretricius.—Kil. Swab. lottern, umlottern, to lounge about. The idea of looseness is conveyed by a repre-sentation of the flapping sound of loose clothes, or the splashing of liquids. Du. lobberen, to trample in water or mire ; slobberen, to slap up liquids, slubber up a business—Bomhoff; slobberen, slodderen, to flag, hang loosely—Kil. ; slodder, slodderer, a slattern, sloven ; Gael. luidir, to paddle in mud or water ; ludraig, to be-spatter with foul water ; ludragan, an untidy person, ludair, a slovenly person. Esthon. loddisema, to hang loose ; lodda-ladda, loose and slack. Swiss lodelen, lödelen, not to be properly tight ; lodel, lodeli, a lazy, litherly man.

Litho-.—Lithograph. Gr. λίθος, a stone ; lithograph, a drawing on stone.

Litigate.—Litigious. Lat. lis, litis, strife, a law-suit, whence litigare, to go to law. As stlis was an ancient form of lis, it may be conjectured that the word originally signified a taking of sides, from W. ystlys, a side. To bandy words (from It. banda, a side) is to conflict in words. All sides in parties and begin the attack.—Pope. See Plead.

Litmus. Du. lakmoes, an infusion of a lake or purple colour ; moes, pottage, broth.

Litter. Fr. litière (from lit, bed), the bedding of cattle, or straw on which they lie, whence E. litter, things strewed about in confusion. Fr. litière signifies also, as Lat. lectica, It. lettiga, Sp. lechiga, a covered couch in which one is borne by men or horses ; lechigada, Fr. ventrée, portée d'une truie, &c., a litter of pigs, puppies, &c., the col-lection of young which the mother has carried in her belly at one time as in a litter.

Little. Goth. leitils, ON. litill, OHG. luzil, Du. luttik, OE. lite, lute.

Littoral. Lat. littus, littoris, the sea-shore.

Liturgy. Gr. λειτουργία, a public ser-vice or ministration, from λειτός (λαός, λεώς, people), public, and ἔργω, to work.

To Live. See Life.

Livelihood. Properly lifelode, way of life, from ON. leið, AS. lad, way. Lyvelyhede or quickness, vivacitas ; lyvelode, or lyfehode, victus.—Pr. Pm. OHG. libleit mensura victus.—Regula Sti. Ben. in Schilter.

I-bidde mi paternoster and mi crede That God hem helpe at hore nede That helpen me mi lif to lede. Wright, Anecdota Litt. Dame Siriz, p. 7.
Mod.Gr. τροπος, way, road ; τροπος της ζωης, way of life, livelihood. See Loadstone.

Liver. AS. lifere, G. leber, liver. Russ. liver', the pluck, or liver, lungs, and windpipe. Perhaps the liver, from colour and consistency, may be regarded as a mass of clotted blood. ON. lifraz, G. leberen, to clot, congeal; gelebert blut, clotted blood. Da. dial. lubber, anything coagulated ; E. loppered milk, curdled milk.

Livery. Fr. livrée, from livrer, to deliver; something given out at stated times and in stated quantities, as clothes of a certain pattern to distinguish the servants or adherents of the donor, or the supply of victuals or horse-provender to which certain members of the household were entitled. Lyvery of cloth or other gyftis, liberata, liberatura.—Pr. Pm.

Livid. Lat. liveo, to grow pale, wan, discoloured.

Lizard. Fr. lézard, It. lucerta, lusardo, Lat. lacerta. Bret. glazard, a green lizard, from glaz, green.

Lizard-Point. From having been a place of retirement for lazars. Several places in a like situation are known by this name in Brittany, where there is now commonly a ropewalk, ropemakers being a proscribed race, supposed to be leprous.

Loach. Fr. loche, a small freshwater fish, which possibly is named from being taken under stones. Bret. loc'ha, to stir, take up, remove from its place ; loc'heta, to take up the stones of the shore in looking for small fish. Speaking of the loach, Yarrell says, 'Its habit of lurking under stones often prevents its being observed.'—Brit. Fishes, i. 376.

The miller's-thumb, the hiding loach, The perch, the ever-rubbing roach.—Browne.

Load. AS. hlad, load ; hladan, to load ; ON. hladi, a heap ; hlada, a barn ; hlad, a street, road, paved place ; hladinn, piled up, laden ; hlass, a load, waggonload. N. lad, a pile, heap of things laid in order.

Loadstone.—Loadstar. AS. lád, ON. leid, a way, journey. AS. lád-man, a leader, director ; ládscipe, a conducting. ON. leidar-bref, a safe-conduct ; leidarstein, a loadstone, stone of the way or of conduct ; leidarstiarna, loadstar, star of conduct ; leida, AS. lædan, to lead, conduct.

Loaf. AS. hlaf, Goth. hlaibs, hlaifs, Russ. chljeb, Pol. chleb. Fin. laip, bread, loaf ; Lat. libum, a cake.

To Loaf.—Loafer. A loafer, in modern slang imported from America, is an idle lounger, perhaps from Sp. gallofear, to saunter about and live upon alms ; galloféro, idle, lazy vagabond. Or from It. gaglioffa, a scrip (the badge of a beggar) or pocket. But more probably perhaps from G. laufen, to run, to go to and fro, to haunt ; whence gassenlaufer, an idler of the streets ; irrläufer, landläufer, a landlouper or vagabond.—Sanders.

Loam. AS. lam, Du. leem, G. leim, lehm, clay, tenacious earth. Lat. limus, mud, clay. See Lime.

Loan. ON. lán, a loan, to be distinguished from laun, G. lohn, AS. lean, a reward, wages. See Lend.

To Loathe.—Loth. AS. lath, hateful, evil, injury. Me lath wæs, I was loth ; Gode tha lathustan, the most hateful to God. G. leid, what is offensive to the feelings. Weder zu liebe noch zu leide, neither from love nor hatred. Es thut mir leid, I am sorry for it. Du. leed, grief, sorrow, evil, injury ; leeden, tædere, fastidire. Fr. laid, loathly, ugly.

The original image is probably the disgust felt at a bad smell. Bret. louz, stinking, dirty, impure, obscene, ugly. Lathand is used in the Flyting of Kennedy and Dunbar in the sense of stinking.

Laithly and lowsy, lathand as a leek.

Lob.—Looby. The radical image is of something not having strength to support itself, but hanging slack, dangling, drooping. To lob, to hang down, to droop ; to lob along, to walk lazily, as one fatigued ; lob, looby, a clown, a dull, lumpish, lazy, or awkward person.

Grete lobies and long, and loth were to swynke. P. P.

But as the drone the honey hive doth rob, With worthy books so deals this idle lob. Gascoigne.

Du. loboor, a pig or dog with hanging ears, a raw, silly youth ; lobbes, a booby ; labberlot, one who loiters about the streets ; Wall. loubreie, idleness, vagabondage ; ON. lubbaz, to loiter about, segniter volutari ; lubbi, a dog with shaggy coat and hanging ears, a lazy servant ; Fin. luoppata, to do anything slowly ; luoppio, a sluggard ; W. llabi, llabwst, a long lubber, big clouterly fellow.

The origin of all these terms seems to be a representation of the sound of things of a flabby or loose structure flapping upon themselves, dangling, or dashing. Du. flabberen, to flag, flap as sails; labberen, to shiver in the wind; slobberen, to hang loose and slack, to slap up liquids, eat awkwardly; lobberen, to trample in wet and mire; Esthon. lobbisema, to tattle (the idea of much talking being commonly expressed by terms taken from the dashing of liquids); lobbi, sleet, a mixture of snow and rain; W. llabio, to slap.

Lobby.—Lodge. Lobby, antechamber, porch, gallery. G. laube (from laub, foliage, as OFr. foillie, a hut, from feuille, a leaf), an arbour, bower formed of the branches of trees; lauberhütte, a booth or hut of green branches. Mid.Lat. labia, laubia, laubium, an open portico, cloisters. 'Deambulatorium quod propriè dicitur lobium, quod fit juxta domos ad spatiandum.'—Joh. de Janua. Grisons laupia, laupchia, lauchia, labgia, lobgia, gallery in a church, open gallery in front of a house. It. loggia, an open gallery, banqueting-house, fair porch in the street side.—Fr. loge, a lodge, shed, cote or small house, booth in a market.

Lobster. AS. lopust, lopystre, Lat. locusta marina. A similar interchange of p and k is seen in Dan. visk, E. wisp; N. lopp, a lock of wool, hay, &c., E. lock.

Local.—Locate. Lat. locus, a place.

Lock. 1. ON. lokkr. Da. lok, G. locke, AS. loc, a curl or ringlet of hair; locgewind, curled hair; Du. locke, vlocke, a lock or flock of wool or the like; ON. lockr, a lock of hair, curl.

Lock. 2.—Locker. Goth. lukan, Du. loken, luycken (Kil.), ON. loka. Da. lukke, to shut, close, fasten; l. een inde, to lock one up; l. op, to open, unlock. ON. lok, a cover, anything that serves for fastening, shutter, latch, and fig. conclusion, end. Du. luik, shutter, AS. loc, a place shut in, cloister, prison, fold; also what fastens, a lock.

A locker is a receptacle made by a seat with a moveable top. Sw. lock, Da. laage, cover; laagebænk, a locker. Du. loker, loculamentum, theca.—Kil.

Lodge. Fr. loge, a hut or small apartment. See Lobby. Hence loger, to sojourn, abide for a time; which however agrees in a singular manner with Russ. lojit' (Fr. j), to place, to lay; lojitsya, to lay oneself down, lie down; Serv. loja, lying place. Illyr. lojiti, to lay; lojnitza, a sleeping apartment.

Loft.—Lofty. ON. lopt, the sky or air, also the open space in the roof at the top of a house; á lopt, on high, aloft. Dan. loft, ceiling, loft. See Lift.

* Log. An unshaped lump of timber, a piece of firewood, in which sense clog is also used; a Yule-log or a Yule-clog. So we have lump and clump; E. lob, a large lump, a clown (Hal.), and Sw. dial. klabb, a log or block. It is probable that dob, clod, clog, as well as the weaker forms lob and log, are formed on a common principle. See Clod.

The log of a vessel is a contrivance for retaining the distant end of a line unmoved in the water while the vessel runs on, for the purpose of ascertaining the rate of sailing. Originally perhaps a simple log thrown out behind. To lie like a log is to lie perfectly unmoved.

To Log.—Logger. To log, to oscillate.—Hal. To logger, to shake as a wheel that has been loosened and does not move correctly.—Forby. Dan. logre, to wag the tail; Sw. dial. loka, to work a thing to and fro in order to get it loose; Fr. locker, to rattle, to shake from looseness; Bav. lugk, lugker, Swiss lug, luck, G. locker, loose. Esthon. loggisema, to rattle, wabble.

A parallel series with a dental instead of guttural termination is found in Bav. lotter, loose, slack, and lottern, to shake; die bank lod't (lottert), the bench joggles, is unsteady. Swiss lodelen, to be loose, not properly fast; lodern, to dangle, to hang loose and slack; Du. lodderen in 't bedde, to lie loose in bed; lodderbank, a couch. Corresponding forms in the guttural class are Pl.D. luggern, to lie lazily in bed; luggerbank, a couch.

Logic, -logy. Gr. λόγος, a word spoken, λογικός, of or belonging to reason, and to words as exponents of reason; whence ἡ (τέχνη) λογική, the art of reasoning in words.

Logwood. 'Whereas of late years there hath been brought into this realm of England a certain kind of ware or stuff called Logwood, alias Blockwood.'—Stat. 23 Eliz. c. ix.

Loin. Fr. longe, the loin. Longe, the loin or flank, the fleshy part of the neck, back, and reins cut along the back.—Cot. Du. longie, loenie, lumbus vitellinus.—Kil. Wal. logne, OFr. logne, Sc. lunyie, loin.

Usually derived from Lat. lumbus, by the common change of mb into ng. Mid. Lat. lumbus, lungus, lende, lem, schlegbrat.—Dief. Supp. Fr. longue, the loin.—Cot. See Lumbago.
To Loiter.—Lounge. The Teutonic dialects abound in verbs of a frequentative form, which are used in the first instance to signify the flapping or shaking of loose things (frequently also the dashing of liquids), then to express a slack and unstrung way of doing anything, or simply a total absence of activity and exertion. Hence are formed nouns (to which the loss of the frequentative element often gives the appearance of radicals instead of derivatives), signifying the fluttering object, a slothful, negligent person, or adjectives of corresponding meaning. Du. slobbem (see Lob), sloddern, G. schlottern, to flap, wabble, dangle ; Swiss lottern, to joggle ; Bav. lotterti, lotteln, to waggle, tremble, go lazily (schlapp einhergehen) ; Fin. lotto, anything dangling ; Bav. latter, lottel, loitel, a lazy or loose-living man ; latterbank, a couch for repose ; Du. lodderen int bedde, in de sonne, to lie lazily in bed, to idle in the sun ; Pl.D. luddern, to be lazy ; Du. lunderen, to dawdle (cunctanter agere)—Kil. ; Swiss lodelen, l'odelen, to be loose, not properly fast ; lodeli arbeit, loose, imperfect work ; umelodeln, to loiter about ; lodel, lodeli, careless, negligent person ; lodern, to dangle, hang loose and slack, loden, a rag ; Du. loteren, leuteren, to vacillate, loiter, delay—Kil. ; ON. lötra, to loiter, go slow and lazily.
With a change to the guttural class of consonants may be cited E. logger, to shake ; G. locker, Swiss lugg, luck, loose ; Pl.D. luggern, lungern, to lie abed, indulge in sloth, luggerbank (as Du. lodderbank), a couch.
Then with the passage from the sound of k to that of ch, which is so usual in Fr. and E. dialects, Fr. locher, to shake, joggle ; Swiss lotschen, to wabble, be negligent, slack ; umelotschen, to move about as if all the joints were loose ; lotschi, a person of loose character ; Bav. verlatscht, latschet (of things that ought to be fast or stiff), loose, clammy ; E. dial, louch-eared, having hanging ears.—Mrs Baker. The addition of the nasal, as in luddern, lundern, luggern, lungern, above-mentioned, converts Swiss lotschen into luntschen (of clothes), to hang flapping and dangling, to move lazily ; umeluntscherL, to lounge about, lie idly about without sleeping ; Westerwald lonzen, lunzen, to lie in bed out of season ; Bav. lunzen, lunzeln, to slumber, lunzig, soft, limber, E. dial. lingey.
To Loll.—Lill. The fact that the letter l is the consonant naturally sounded with the protruded tongue produces Swiss lallen, E. loll or lill, to lill out the tongue as a dog that is weary.—Fl. Bav. lallen, to speak thick, as one with too large a tongue, and (speaking contemptuously) to talk, reminding us of Gr. λαλειν, to talk. Bav. lallen, lullen, to suck as an infant ; Du. lellen, to suck, to tattle, chatter ; lelle, lelleken, the tip of the tongue, or any similar object, nipple, uvula, lap of the ear ; Swiss lalli, Bav. leller, the tongue ; Dan. lalle, to prattle ; Fin. läl-lättää, to speak thick, mutter, tattle.
Then from the imperfect speech of infancy, Bav. gelall, childish play, sport, lovers' toying ; Pol. lala, a baby ; lalka, a doll ; E. loll, to dandle, fondle.
He lolled her in his arms, He lulled her on his breast.—Hal.
Du. lollen, to coddle oneself, warm oneself over the coals.
The same transfer from imperfect speech to imperfect action, which we have seen in famble and fumble, gives ON. lall, the first imperfect walk of a child ; lalla, to toddle ; lalli, a toddling infant ; lolla, to move or act slowly ; loll, lolla, sloth ; E. loll, to lounge, give way to sloth ; Du. lollebancke, a couch, lounging bench ; Swiss löhli (maulaffe), a booby, soft person ; l'odlen, umelohlen, to lounge about ; Mod.Gr. λωλός, silly, foolish ; Fin. lolli, lelli, a lazybones, slothful, effeminate person ; lallatella, lollittella, to lead a loose or slothful life ; ON. loll, loth, sloth.
Lollard. The meaning of the word, as appears from the last article, is simply a sluggard. But in OE. to loll was specially applied to the idle life of persons wandering about and living at other men's cost.
For an hydel man thou semest— Other a spille tyme.
Other beggest thy lyve Aboute ate menne hatches, Other faitest upon Fridays Other feste days in churches ; The whiche is lollerme life.
P.P. P. 514, Wright's ed.
For all that han here hele And here eyen syghte, And lymes to laborye with, And lolleres lyf usen, Lyven ayens Godes lawe And love of holy churche.—p. 527.
In this sense the term was applied to the devotees mentioned under Bigot, who in the 13th and 14th centuries went about preaching reformation of life, and excited the indignation of the church by not joining the regular orders. 'Eodem anno (1309) quidam hypocritæ gyrovagi, qui Lollardi sive Deum-laudantes vocabantur, per Hannoniam et Brabantiam quasdam mulieres nobiles deceperunt.'—Hocsemius in Duc. Afterwards the term was appropriated to the followers of Wicliff in England. Lollaerd, Lollebroeder, Alexianus monachus, Waldensis.—Kil.
Among other opprobrious names given to the same class of devotees, they were also called Beghards, Mid.Lat. Begardi, Bigardi, a term signifying one who carries a bag, identical with E. beggar.
For they bereth no bagges Ne non botels under clokes, Whiche is Lollerene lyfe.—P. P.
Lollipops. It has been shown under Loll that the sound made by speaking with the protruded tongue is represented by the syllables lal, lei, lol, whence Bav. lallen, to suck, lullen, to suck the tongue, thumb, &c.; leller, the tongue. To lull, to suck.
My lytylle childe lyth alle lame That lullyd on my pappys. Slaughter of the Innocents, Coventry Myst. 182.
The latter part of the word is from papa, the infantine expression for eating, as mama for drink. Papa is used by children in the Tirol to signify a desire for eating, and hence they apply the term pappe, pappele, to anything nice to eat; zucker-pappele, Pl.D. zucker-popp, sweeties, lollipops.—D. M., iv. De pipernat un de appel, de siben semmelpoppen un de ein zuckerpopp : the gingerbread and the appel, the seven cakes and one sugar-plum.—Olle Kamellen, p. 4. Sp. repapilarse, to overload one's stomach with dainties. Pol. papinki, dainties, tidbits. Lollipops would thus signify sucking dainties.

Lombard-house. A pawnbroker's shop.—B.
They had put all the little plate they had in the Lombard, which is pawning it.—Life of Lady G. Baillie in Trench.
Du. Lombaerd, fœnerator, usurarius; Lombaerde, taberna seu mensa usuraria.—Kil. Lombaerd, lombert, lommert, place where they lend money on pledge.—Halma. From the trade of dealing in money commonly followed by Lombards in the middle ages, whence in London, Lombard Street, the street occupied by bankers.

Lone.—Lonely. From alone, G. allein, all one, simply one. See Alone.

Long.—To Linger. Goth. laggs, ON. langr, Lat. longus, Pol. dlugi, long. Probably from the notion of slackness, which is coincident with that of length in many cases. Swiss lugg, luck, loose, slack ; das seil lugget, the rope slackens, i. e. when it is longer than is necessary to reach to the point required. Si lengent iro unriht also seil, they stretch out their wickedness as a rope.—Notker. Sint kelengit, relaxantur—Kero; Gilengit werdent, prolongabuntur.—Graff. A slug is one who drags on without exertion, is slack or slow in action, is long about his work. To lag behind (w. llag, slack, sluggish, Gael. lag, faint) is to linger, to be long in coming up.
The representatives of Lat. languere (from the root lag, slack, faint) are occasionally synonymous, or are perhaps confounded with verbs formed from the adj. long. Fr. languir, to droop, faint, hang the head, also to linger, idle it, be lither.—Cot. Languir dans une prison, to linger in prison. Donnez lui cela, ne le faites pas languir. Languedoc langhi, to be ennuied, to find it long, also, as G. verlangen, to long for. Langhisse de vous veire, I long to see you.

Loof. The windward side of a ship. To loof or luff, to turn the ship towards the wind, and, as a ship to windward of another has the power of escaping it, if an equally good sailor, aloof, on loof, is out of reach.
It is not easy to make out exactly what part of the ship the loof originally was. Du. loef, i. a rullock or oar-pin, scalmus, but the loof was a timber of considerable size, by which the course of the ship was directed ; it would seem to be the large oar used by way of a rudder, or perhaps the tiller.
Weder stod on wille, Wind mid than beste, Heo rihten heore loeues. And up drogen selles, Lithen over saestrem.
The weather stood at will. The wind at the best. They righted their loeufs And up drew the sails, Voyaged over sea stream. Layamon 3, 242.
'Paié à A. pur un mast de rouge sapin de cent pees longe, un loffe, une verge et une bowespret apertcnant à dit mast, £6 17s. 7d.'
'Ascendentes vero naves et velificantes perrexerunt itaque audacter obliquando dracenam, quæ vulgariter dicitur lof, ac si vellent adire Calesiam, sed Angli maris periti—subito cum se scivissent ventum exhausisse (had got to windward), versa dracena ex transversa vento sibi jam secundo insecuti sunt hostes alacriter.'—Matth. Paris in Bart. Cotton, p. 108.
Du. loeuen, deflectere sive declinare navigio, cedere.—Kil.

To Look. Bav. luegen, Swiss lugen, to look ; hugi, a spy-glass, telescope ; lugen, eyes ; ON. glugga, to spy, look narrowly after ; gluggr, window, hole ; Dan. glughul, peep-hole ; Wall. louki, to look, to spy ; OFr. louquer, Fr. loucher, to look askance, to squint ; It. allucciare, to fix the eyes on a thing ; Lang. lucado, Wall. loukite, a gleam of light ; loukerote, a glance, a small opening, peep-hole.
Loom. An utensil, tool.
The lomes that I labour with And lyflode deserve Is Paternoster and my primere.—P. P.
Lome or instrument, utensile ; loome of webbares craft, telarium.—Pr. Pm. Utensilia, andluman.— AS. Vocab. in Nat. Ant. Du. alaem, alaem, utensilia ; werck-alaem, tools.—Kil. Gael. lamh, hand, handle.
To Loom. To show a faint light, to be seen dimly, as a ship at a distance or in a mist. It. lume, light, and fig. knowledge, notice, hint.—Al.t. Aver lume, to have knowledge of a thing. Piedm. lume, Venet. lumare, to observe attentively.
The word may, however, have come to us from a Northern source. ON. hljóma, Sw. dial. hljumma, lumma, lomma, luma, to resound ; ljumm, lomm, resonance, sound, rumour ; lymt, lömt, hint, rumour. Få en lymt om, to get wind of. Thence a glimpse or imperfect sight of an object. Se en lymt, to get a glimpse. ON. hljómar, it is rumoured.
Loon.—Lown. A lazy, good-for-nothing fellow. Du. loen, homo stupidus, insulsus.—Kil. Probably from the notion of inactivity and slowness, as most of these contemptuous appellations ; lungis, looby, Fr. lambin, G. lummel, &c. Lim. loung, loun, Rouchi lon, slow, tedious. ODu. lome, slow, lazy.
Loop. Gael. lub, bend, bow, noose, loop ; lubach, crooked ; lublin, a curved line ; lubshruth, a winding stream.
Loop-hole. A peep-hole in the wall of a castle, from whence to shoot in safety at the enemy. Lang. loup, a small window in a roof.
Lat no light leopen yn at loverne at loufe.—P. P.
Du. luipen, to peep, to lurk ; op zijne luipen liggen, to lie in wait ; gluipen, to peep ; gluiper, one that wears his hat deep in his face, so as to hide his eyes, one that acts secretly. De deur staat op eene gluip, the door is ajar. N. glupa, to gape ; glaapa, to stare ; glop, a hole, an opening ; gloypa, to gape, not to shut fast ; Dan. glippe, to wink ; Du. glippen, LOP to slip away. Sw. dial. glipa, to gape, stand open ; glip, crack.
Loop-hole is frequently used in the sense of a secret means of escape, as G. schlupf-loch, a hiding-place, hole into or through which one may slip, a loop-hole, evasion, or shift. Du. ter gluip, ter stuip, secretly ; sluipdeur, a secret door, figuratively loop-hole, evasion ; sluip-hoek, a lurking-place.
Loose. Slack. Du. los, loose, slack, free ; Goth. laus, loose, empty, void, of none effect ; laus vairthan, to come to nothing ; laus as a termination, -less ; akranalaus, fruitless ; andelaus, endless ; lausqithrs, empty-bellied, fasting ; lausa-vaurds, an idle talker ; lausjan, to loose, separate, make void.
Loover. A loouer or tunnel in the roof or top of a great hall to avoid smoke, fumarium, spiramentum.—Baret ; louer of a hall, esclere.—Palsgr. Vedetta, a lour or high lantern on the top of a house.—Fl. Yorkshire love, lover, a chimney.—Craven Gl. ON. liori, the opening in the roof of a house to let out smoke, a window ; N. ljore, air-hole in the roof to let out the smoke ; ljora, to clear up ; ljor, opening among clouds ; glira, to peep, to show light through ; glira, a streak of light, crack in a wall. Pl.D. gluren, luren, to peep, to lour. See To Lour.
The accented ð and hl of the ON. are in other cases represented in E. by the aid of a v ; ON. frá, Yorkshire frav, from ; ON. dúra, E. dover, to slumber ; ON. þín, E. levin, lightning.
Lop. Lop-eared, lap-, topper-, lave-, louch-, slouch-eared—Baker, having hanging ears ; lop-sided, having one side hanging down. Fin. loppa, lotto, anything hanging or dangling ; loppa-korwa, a hanging ear ; loppa-huuti, a hanging lip ; ON. lapa, slapa, to flag, hang loose ; slapeyrdr, N. lap-oyrt, lav-oyrt, lop-eared.
The origin is the sound made by soft or loose things flapping or falling. Du. slobberen, slodderen, G. schlottern, Esthon. toddisema, to hang loose and slack ; Du. slodderen. Swab. lottern, to lie loosely stretched, to lounge ; loppern, Swiss lottern, to shake about, not to hold fast. See Lob.
The form louch-eared may be compared with Bav. latschen, totschen, to go about or do anything slackly and lazily ; vertatscht, tatschet (of things that ought to be fast or stiff), slack, soft, clammy. Melting snow becomes tatschet, to be compared with E. slush, sludge. Dan. slaske, to dabble, paddle, also (of clothes)

to flap about. — Bav. latsch, a wide mouth, a mouth with or hanging lips; ON. loka, to trail, hang loose'; lókr, anything hanging.

* To Lop. Lap or lop, the faggot-wood of a tree. — Mrs B. It. lappare, to lap or lop trees. — Fl. Perhaps to be explained from Cotgrave's 'estagner, to gueld trees, to lop or cut off their branches,' reminding us of Pl.D. lubben, E. lib, to geld.

Loppered. Coagulated, of milk or blood. OHG. leberen, gelebern, to coagulate; lebermere, congealed sea; ON. lifraz, to clot; Dan. dial. lubber, anything coagulated or gelatinous; Du. klobber-saen, clotted or curdled cream.

The radical image is the flapping of soft and wet or loose things, which are commonly expressed by the same term, as in Dan. slaske, to dabble, paddle, to flap as loose clothes; Du. lobberen, to wade and trample in the mire; lobberig, gelatinous; Mag. lobogni, to waver, flutter; lobozni, to splash; Swab. loppern, to be shaky; lopperig, loose; Westerwald lappern, to shake to and fro, wabble as an unsound chair, flap as loose clothes; Swiss labbig, lappig, watery, läbberete, watery food; Banffsh. labber, to make a noise with a liquid, sup a liquid hastily; E. slobbery, wet, sloppy; Du. slobberen, to flap as loose clothes, related to E. slab, thick, as Du. lobberen to lobberig, gelatinous.

Make the gruel thick and slab. — Macbeth.

Ir. slaib, mud, ooze. 'The slob embankment.' — Times, Oct. 10, 1861.

The same relation holds good between Bav. schlottern, to dabble in wet, to flap as loose clothes, and Schlatter, coagulated milk, mud, dirt; schloti, mud, dirt, thawing weather; Swab. schludern, to slobber, spill, slop; geschluder, slops, dirty liquid.

It must be observed that when a body is of a mixed consistency between solid and liquid, it will be considered as thick or thin according to the extreme with which it is compared. A substance must be of a watery consistence in which we can splash and dabble, and on the other hand it is only when a liquid is thickened and becomes gelatinous that it is capable of retaining a tremulous or wabbling motion. Thus words of the same immediate derivation come to have directly opposite meanings, as Swiss labbig, and E. slab, above-mentioned.

Loquacious. -loqu-. -locu-. Lat. loquor, locutus to speak, whence Eloquent, Obloquy, Colloquy, &c.

Lord. AS. hlaford, ON. lavardr.

Lore. AS. láre, teaching. See Learn.

Lorimer. Fr. lorain, is formed from loramen, a derivative of Lat. lorum, a strap, in the same way as Fr. airain, brass, from æramen, a similar derivative of æs, æris. Hence Fr. loremier, lornier, corresponding to Lat. loraminarius, a maker of straps. 'Quiconque veut estre lormiers à Paris, c'est à savoir faiseurs de frains et de lorains,' 'estre le peut franchement.' — Livre des Mestiers, p. 222. Champ. lorain, lorein, a bridle, strap; loire, a strap; lorimier, lormier, a saddler, worker in harness of leather. Bret. ler, skin, leather; leren, strap; Du. leder, leer, leather.

To Lose. AS. lesan, Goth. fraliusan, G. verlieren.

Lot. Goth. hlauts, G. Loos, ON. hlutr, lot; hluti, portion; hluta, to cast lots, obtain by lot.

Lotion. Lat. lavo, lautum or lotum, to wash.

Loud. ON. hljod, sound; G. laut, sound; and as an adj. loud.

To Lounge. See Loiter.

* To Lour. — To Leer. To lour and leer are cognate forms descended at no distant period from a common ancestor. The radical image is shown in ON. hlóra, hlera, to listen, whence we pass to the notion of privily observing, peeping, looking in a covert way. G. lauern. Dan. lure, to listen, eavesdrop, watch; Pl.D. luren, to watch in a covert manner, to wait his opportunity, to keep back in a sly way; luurhaftig, of a sly and covert nature; l. weer, doubtful or suspicious weather, weather which seems to harbour ill intentions. Luren, gluren (of the weather), to lour, to look with covert aspect, to threaten rain. To lour, to look sour or grim, to begin to be overcast with clouds. — B.

The Du. equivalent loeren shows the passage to E. leer, to cast a cunning or a wistful look. — B. Loeren, to peer, peep, leer; specially with desire to possess oneself of something. — Bomhoff. Norw. glira, to peep, wink, half close the eyes, to be open so that one can see through. It is mere accident that lour signifies to spy, with covert feelings of ill-will, and leer with those of desire.

Louse. w. Laus, G. laus.

Lout. A clownish, unmannerly fellow. — B. Du. loete, kloete, homo agrestis, insulsus, stolidus. — Kil. Perhaps from the notion of a lump or clod, a rude, un-shaped, inactive thing. Milan. *lotta*, a clod; Prov. *lot*, heavy, indolent, slow. 'Non es *lotz* ni *coartz*,' he is not sluggish nor cowardly. *Lot*, mud, dirt.
To Lout. ON. *luta*, to stoop; Sw. *luta*, to stoop, lean, incline, go downwards, slope, to tilt a cask. The primary meaning is probably like that of *glout*, to look covertly, look from beneath the brows, and so to hold the head down. N. *glytta*, to peep; Dan. dial. *lutte* (of the weather), to lour, look threatening.
Love. G. *lieben*, to love; Lat. *libet*, *lubet*, it pleases; *libens edere*, to eat with a good appetite; *libido*, *lubido*, pleasure, desire, lust; Boh. *lubiti*, *libiti*, *libowati*, to love, to have pleasure in; *libitise*, to be pleased; *libost*, will, pleasure; *liby*, sweet, agreeable, pleasant; *libati*, to kiss, to taste; Pol. *lubić*, *lubować*, to have an inclination for, to relish, to like; *luby*, lovely, sweet, delicious; Serv. *lyubav*, love; *lyubiti*, to kiss; Russ. *liobit'*, to love; *naliobovatsya*, to have pleasure in; *lobzat'*, to kiss. So Fris. *muwlckjen*, to kiss, also to have pleasure in, from *muwlle*, the mouth. Sicilian *liccari*, to lick, to flatter, to make love; *liccaturi*, a lover; *licchettu*, the flavour of wine; *licchiteddu*, taste, savour.

As kissing is the most obvious manifestation of love, we might naturally suppose that the word was derived from these Slavonic words signifying kiss. But it is more probable that they have both a common origin in a representation of the sound of smacking the tongue and lips, which gives rise to the Lat. *lambere*, *labium*, E. *lap*, *lip*, Walach. *limba*, the tongue; Esthon. *libbama*, to lick; Fr. *lippée*, a good morsel, a snack; Bret. *lipa*, to lick; *lipous*, delicate, tasty.

It will be observed that the Bohem. *libati* is both to kiss and to taste, exactly as E. *smack* is used in both senses, or as NFris. *macke*, to kiss, compared with Fin. *makia*, sweet, well tasted. Now the pleasure of taste is commonly taken as the type of all gratification. The rude tribes met with in a late expedition towards the sources of the Nile expressed their admiration of the beads shown them by rubbing their bellies.—Petherick, Egypt and the Nile, 448. And Burton shows that joy and affection is expressed in the same way on the W. of Africa. 'At the peroration he expressed the gladness of the Alake to see us at his capital; as for himself, he rubbed his bony hands on his lean stomach to show the yearning LUBBER of his own proper bowels towards us.'—Abeokutah and Camaroens, i, 148.
In the Tyrolese dialect *schläk* (G. *schlecken*, to lick), is used for pleasure, enjoyment. 'Es ist mir kei *schläk*, it is no pleasure to me; *er ist zum rächte schläk cho*, he is come at the right moment for enjoyment, at a show, for instance.—D. M. iii. 458. The Lat. *deliciæ*, meaning originally appetising food, is figuratively used in the sense of darling. To look sweet upon one is to look with loving eyes. Indeed, it is probable that the act of kissing is a symbol expressive of the feelings entertained towards the object of affection by the figure of smacking the lips over a delicate morsel. Thus the expression of devouring with kisses would be but a return to the original image.

On the foregoing theory Lat. *voluptas* would imply the representation of the smacking of the palate, by a root *vlup* alongside of *lub*, analogous to E. *flip*, or *fillip*, for a smack with the fingers, or to the old *wlap*, for *lap*, It. *viluppare*, *voluppare*, to wrap.

Low. 1. ON. *lágr*, short, low; Sw. *låg*, Du. *laag*, low.
Low. 2. ON. *logi*, Sw. *låge*, Dan. *lue*, love, AS. *læg*, *lig*, flame; Gr. *φλόξ* (*phlox*), *φλογός*, flame; *φλέγω*, Lat. *flagrare*, to flame, to burn. The origin is seen in Du. *flaggeren*, to flap, to flutter, from the wavering action so characteristic of flame. In the same way, from Du. *flodderen*, to be in a wavering state, *lodderen* (properly to hang loose), to lounge, Swiss *lodern*, to flap as loose clothes, we pass to G. *lodern*, to waver, to blaze. So also from E. *logger*, Magy. *logni*, to oscillate, shake to and fro, Dan. *logre*, to wag, we are led to ON. *logi*, flame. The same train of thought is seen in Magy. *lobogni*, to waver, flutter, and *lob*, flame, *lobbanni*, to blaze, flame.

To Low. AS. *hlowan*, Du. *loeien*, G. *luien*, to low. Lith. *loti*, to bark.

Loyal. Fr. *loyal*, OFr. *leal*, from Lat. *legalis*. *Lex*, *legis*, Fr. *loi*, law.

Lozenge. Fr. *lozange*, a little square cake of preserved herbs, &c., also a quarrel of a glass window, anything of that form.—Cot. From Piedm. Sp. *losa*, Lang. *laouzo*, a slate, flag, flat stone for paving, commonly set cornerwise, in which the idea of a lozenge mainly differs from that of a square. Boh. *dlazice*, a tile; *dlaziti*, to pave.

Lubber.—Lubbard. A lumpish, sluggish, clumsy fellow.—Worcester. Da.

lubbet, N. lubben, thick, fat, obese ; lubb, lubba, one who is thick and fat ; Sw. dial. lubbig, thick and clumsy ; lubber, a thick, clumsy, lazy man ; lubba, the same of a woman. Du. lompsch, lumpish, dull, lazy ; lompert, a coarse fellow. See Lob.
Lubricate. Lat. lubricus, slippery.
Lucid.—Lucifer. Lat. lux, lucis, light ; luceo, to shine. Russ. lutsch, lutschâ, a ray ; lutschina, a match ; Serv. lutsch, a torch ; lutscha, a ray of the sun.
Luck. G. gluck, Du. luk, geluk, happiness, enjoyment, prosperity, fortune. The appearance of composition with the particle ge in Du. geluk is probably fallacious, as it is very common to find parallel forms with an initial l, and gl, or cl respectively, as Du. gluypen and luypen, to spy, E. gloom and loom, glowre and lour, glout and lout, clump and lump, clog and log, &c. The origin may perhaps be found in the primary type of all pleasure, and expressed by the syllables gluk, glick, lick, representing the sound of smacking the tongue in the enjoyment of taste. ' Comment trouves-tu le liquide du Pere L. Parfait ; oui parfait, repondit elle en faisant claquer sa langue contre son palais.'—Montepin. W. gwefus-glec, a smack with the lips ; Gr. γλιχομαι, to desire earnestly, properly, as Lat. ligurio, to lick the chops at ; γλυκυς, sweet ; G. leckerbissen, delicacies. See Like.
Lucre.—Lucrative. Lat. lucrum, gain, profit.
Lucubration. Lat. lucubrare, to study or work by lamplight ; from lux, lucis, light.
-lude. -lus-. Lat. ludo, lusum, to play, sport, mock ; allude, to jest at, to allude in discourse ; delude, to deceive.
Ludicrous. Lat. ludicer, ludicris, connected with sport, laughable, from ludus, play, sport.
Luff. See Loof.
\* Lug.—To Lug. Lug, the ear of an animal, the ear or handle of a pitcher, iron pot, or the like. In stave-made vessels the end of the stave which projects beyond the rest and serves as a handle is the lug, whence probably Sc. leglen, a milking pail with such a handle. The pot lugs are the perforated ears of metal rising above the brim of the pot and receiving the ends of the moveable bow. The meaning of Sw. lugg is somewhat different, the forelock or hanging hair of the forehead ; Da. dial. lugget, shaggy. Sw. lugga, like E. to lug, is to pull by the hair or ears. Lugga någon i skägget, to pull one by the beard ; i örat, to lug one by the ear ; luggas, to pull each other about.
His ears were laving like a new-lugg'd sow. Bp Hall.
It is not easy to say whether the verb is derived from the noun or the converse. Certainly the meaning of the E. verb is exactly such as would arise from the metaphor of pulling by the ear. On the other hand it is not obvious what there is in common between the ear and the forelock except as affording means of laying hold of an animal and leading him along. In the latter point of view to lug may be to drag along like a rope trailing on the ground. Swiss lugg, loose, slack ; luggen, to be slack ; das seil lugget, E. lug, anything slow in movement ; luggard, a sluggard ; lugsome, heavy, cumbrous.—Hal.
A kind of weight hangs heavy at my heart, My flagging soul flies under her own pitch Like fowl in air too damp, and lugs along. Dryden in R.—drags or trails along.
Perhaps lug was originally, as Nares explains it, the hanging portion of the ear, then the ear in general. Coles renders it in Lat. auris lobus, auricula infima.
Lukewarm. Pl.D. slukwarm, lukewarm, might be plausibly explained from sluken, to swallow, swallowing hot. But w. llug, partly, half, llug-dwym (Spurrell), llug-oer (Jones), lukewarm (twym, hot ; oer, cold), must be explained from another quarter. The corresponding forms in the other Celtic dialects are Manx lieh, half, party, side (lieh-doal, half-blind ; lieh-oor, half an hour) ; Gael. leas, leath, leth, half, partly, by (leth-shuill, one eye; leth-ruadh, reddish ; leth-ainm, leas-ainm, nickname ; leas-athair, step-father), Bret. lez, haunch, extremity, border, and as a preposition, near, by the side of ; lestad, step-father, by-father.
The sensible image is preserved in Bret. lez, Manx lhesh, the haunch, hip, whence OFr. delez, hard by, by the side of. N. lid, side, edge ; paa den eine l'a, on the one side. The signification of half comes from our bodies being alike on the two sides, and the Gael. leth is applied to a single one of any of the members of which we have a pair. The Ir. leath is used with the points of the compass as E. side ; leath-theas, on the south side, southwards. From the notion of what is on the side of, we pass to that of addition, excess, superfluity. The E. be-sides has the sense of moreover, in addi-tion to, and on this principle must doubt-less be explained Ir. leath-a, Gael. leas, gain, profit ; Ir. leath-a-daighim (daighim, to give), to increase, enlarge. The G. beiname, a byname, is identical with Fr. surnom, a name over and above, or sur-name. The same connection of ideas is seen in Esthon. liggi, near, hard by, liig. Lap. like, additional, excessive, superflu-ous, which we can hardly avoid identifying with the Celtic elements above mentioned. Compare Lap. like namm, Esthon. liig-nimmi, a nickname or surname, with the Celtic forms, and Esthon. liggi-te (te, way), with Gael. leth-rod, a by-path. In Lap. likai, besides, the E. translation dis-tinctly shows the way in which the idea of excess has arisen.

To Lull. N. lulla, to sing to sleep ; E. lullaby, the song used for that purpose ; lull, repose, quiet. The origin is the re-petition of the syllables la la la in mo-notonous song. G. lallen, to sing without words, only repeating the syllable la.—Küttn. Serv. lyu, lyu, cry to a child while rocking it ; lyu-lyati, to rock ; Russ. ulioliokat', to set a child asleep by rocking and singing ; liolka, a cradle, Esthon. laulma, to sing, laul, a song. From the repetition of na instead of la, arise Mod.Gr. vava, lullaby, and in Fr. nursery language, faire nono, to sleep. It. nanna, a word that nurses use to still their children, as lullaby ; nannare, to lullaby, sing, rock or dandle children asleep ; ninnare, ninnellare, to rock, sing, lull.

Lumbago.—Lumbar. Lat. lumbus, loin. The radical meaning of the word is probably the soft boneless part, as G. weiche, the flank, from weich, soft. Swab. lumpf, soft, spongy ; Hesse, lumm, slack, loose, flabby ; lumbe, the flank or loins.

To Lumber. To rumble, to move heavily with noise and disturbance. Sw. dial. ljumma, lumma, lomma, lumra, lomra, to resound. 'I lumber, I make a noise above one's head : Je fais bruit. You lumbred so above my head I could not sleepe for you.'—Palsgr. Hence lum-ber, old furniture, thrown with noise and disregard. So from G. poltern, to racket, make a noise, polter-kammer, a lumber-room; Pl.D. polterj, racket, lumber. Du. rommelen, to rumble (I ramble, I make noise in a house with remevyng of heavy thynges—Palsgr.) ; alles door elkander rommelen, to turn things topsyturvy ; rommelpot, rommelzo, higgledy-piggledy ; rommeling, G. gerümpel, old furniture, lumber. Dan. skramle, to rumble ; skramleri, lumber, trumpery. The foregoing analogies speak so deci-sively in favour of the derivation from the noise made by throwing things together in a disorderly way, that there is no occa-sion to argue against the fanciful deriva-tion from the obsolete lumbar, a pawn-broker's (Lombard's) shop, where the goods are never exposed to the public eye, and are moreover necessarily kept in the most perfect order.

2. To lumber, in the sense of encum-bering the decks of a ship, seems to be distinct from the foregoing. ODu. lum-mer, lemmer, impedimentum, molestia—Kil. ; Dan. belemre, Du. belemmern, to encumber, impede, lumber ; belemmerung der spraak, impediment of speech.—Hal-ma. This sense seems to arise in analo-gy with Sc. lagger, to bemire, and thence to encumber. Du. lobberen, to wade or trample in the wet ; Da. dial. lummer, anything semifluid, as gruel or mud. Veien staaer i et lummer, the road is all mud. Lumre en væg, to daub a wall with clay and water.

3. Lumber, sawn or split timber. See Limber.

Luminary.—Luminous. Lat. lumen, a clear light, commonly explained as if for lucmen, from the root luc of lux, lucis, &c.

Lump. Corresponding to clump, as log to clog. N. lump, a block, thick piece; ON. klumbr, klumpr, Dan. klump, a lump ; Du. lompe, a rag, tatter, piece, lump ; lompen, to strike, to use one roughly. E. lump also represents the sound of a blow. 'And the flail might lump away.'—Clare. In Du. lompe, G. lumpen, a tatter, it seems to represent the dangling, flapping movement of a tatter, and thence to be extended to a separate portion of any-thing. Bav. lampen, to dangle ; lamp-ende ohren, lop-ears, flapping ears ; lamp-et, torn, broken, loose. So N. lape, to dangle; lappe, a little piece; lopp, a flock of wool, hay, &c., or of sheep ; Fr. loppe, lopin, a gobbet, lump, morsel, a lock of wool.

Lunar.—Lunatic. Lat. luna, the moon ; lunaris, lunaticus, one affected by the changes of the moon, mad.

Lunch.—Luncheon. A lump of some-thing eatable. Closely related to lump, being formed from the flapping sound of a dangling thing represented by a final k instead of P. Bav. lugk, luck, loose; Picard. logue, a rag; Fr. loguet, the latch of a door (from rattling up and down), locher, to joggle, make a noise as a thing that is loose; Champ. lochon, a hunch of bread, of which luncheon is the nasalised form, as lump of Fr. loppe, above mentioned. Lunch also, as lump, was formerly used for the sound of a blow. Dunche or lunche, sonitus, strepitus; lurchinge or lunchinge, tuncio, percussio.—Pr. P. M. It is in this sense that it is the source of the nearly obsolete lungeous, rough in play, violent.

Lune.—To Lunge. See Laniard.

Lung. ON. lunga, G. lunge, Du. longhe, loose, lichte. As the two last of these names are from the light spongy texture of the organ (Du. loos, empty), the origin of lung is seen in Bav. luck, lugk, lung, loose. Aichenholz ist gedigen und hart, tannenholz lung und weich, oak wood is solid and hard, fir wood loose and soft. Sint kelengit, relaxantur.—Kero. Lith. lengwas, light.

Lungis. A lazy dreaming fellow, a slow-back.—B. Fr. longis, a dreaming lusk, tall and dull slangam.—Cot. Rouchi longiner, to do everything slowly. Piedm. longh (of persons), slow, lazy, irresolute. Not so much from long in the sense of taking much time as from the original notion of slack, inactive.

Lupine. Lat. lupinus. It. lupine, a kind of pulse, as if from lupus, translated in Venet. fava lovina, G. wolfsbohne, wolf's beans. But possibly the word may really have come from a Slavonic source. Pol. lupina, shell, cod, husk; lupić, to flay or strip. Mod.Gr. λοῦβι, the pod or husk of a bean.

Lurch. I. To be left in the lurch. A metaphor from the gaming-table. It. lurcio, Fr. lourche, ourche, G. lurz, lurtz, a game at tables; also a term used when one party gains every point before the other makes one. It. lurchio, a lurch or slam, a maiden set at any game.—Fl. 'A person who is lurtz at tables pays double.'—Hans Sachs in Schmeller. Fr. lourche, a lurch in game; il demeura lourche, he was left in the lurch.—Cot.

* To Lurch.—To Lurk. These are originally variations in pronunciation only, differing from each other as church and kirk.

The train of thought may be traced through two parallel series of forms having a terminal s and r respectively, and signifying listen, watch, observe secretly, lie in wait, lie hid, seek to entrap, lure, take privily. With a terminal s, OHG. hlosen, losen, Swiss losen, to listen. Then with a terminal k (as in E. smirk compared with Bav. smieren, to smile), OHG. losgen, losken, to listen (zu ze imo loskende, attentos.— Graff.), to lie hid; OFlem. luyschen observare, insidiari, latere, latitare.—Kil. G. lauschen, to listen, lie listening, lie in wait, look out secretly, peep; Sw. dial. luska, to eavesdrop, privily listen; N. luska. Da. luske, to watch an opportunity, lurk, skulk. With a final t instead of k, ON. hlusta, to listen, corresponding with MHG. luzen, to lie in wait for, to lie hid; luzer, luzener, a listener, eavesdropper, watcher; hasenluzer, hasenluster, one who snares hares; erluzen, to entrap, get by lying in wait for.

In the series with a final r, ON. hlóra, hlera, to listen; standa á hleri, as Da. staa paa lur, G. auf der Lauer sein, to hearken privily, to lie upon the lurch.—Küttn. Da. lure, to listen, eavesdrop, lurk, lie in wait; G. lauern, to lie in wait, lurk, watch, lie upon the lurch or upon the catch. An der Thür lauern, to listen at the door. Die Katze lauert auf die Maus, lies upon the catch for the mouse. Then with the addition of a formative k, as in E. sculk from Du. schuilen, to seek shelter, in Fris. smillen, smilleken (Outzen), smilke (Junge), to smile, or in G. Lauer, Lurke, Lorke, weak wine, swipes, we pass to NFris. lorkin, to listen, and E. lurk, properly to listen, watch, then to lie watching, lie hid. Compare Da. dial. der er lurk i Veiret, when the weather although fine shows signs of change, it lours, looks suspicious, with Pl.D. luurhaftig weer, suspicious weather.

Bailey explains lurch, to steal or pilfer, to lie hid; lurcher, one who lies upon the lurch or upon the catch, as G. auf der Lauer, auf der Lausche sein. In the sense of filch it corresponds to G. erlauschen, to obtain by lurking. Pl.D. luksen, privily to wait for, also to possess oneself of the property of another in a secret way.—Danneil. Lurch is to be understood in the sense of taking privily away, in the passage of Bacon, where it is often explained, to devour. 'Too near [to great cities] lurcheth all provisions and maketh everything dear,'—filches them away.

The lurchline is the line which the fowler lying on the lurch for birds holds in his hand, and by which he pulls over the net upon the birds; to be compared with G. lauschgarn, a net used in catching hares or foxes.

Lure. G. luder, a carcass, carrion, bait for wild animals. It. ludro, Fr. leurre, a falconer's lure, a bait. Hence G. ludern, lüdern, E. allure, to entice. As the stink of carrion is its chief characteristic, the origin may be Bret. louz, loullour, dirty, disgusting, properly stinking, whence louz, a badger.
Lurid. Lat. luridus, of a livid colour.
* Luscious. Fresh or lussyouse as meate is that is not well seasoned or that hath an unpleasant swetnesse in it, fade.— Palsgr. The suggestion of Hickes that the word is a corruption of delicious has been treated as absurd, but the absence of any foreign analogue makes us look to an English origin, and it is certain that the first step in the corruption of delicious was taken in the curtailment of the de.
Mete and drink ynughe they hade With licious drinke and clere. Sir Amadas, xxvii, p. 38.
Moreover luscious was used in the sense of delicious. Frigalleries, dainties, lickorish morsels, luscious acates.— Cot. The same change of meaning from sweetness to excess of sweetness is seen in Du. smets (from smetsen, to smack the chops), which is rendered by Bomhoff delicious, delicate, and by Kil. prædulcis, mulseus, insulsus, et nauseam provocans nimiâ dulcedine.
Lusk. A slug, or slothful fellow.—B. The idea of listening, watching, waiting on, leads to the sense of suspension of action, sluggishness or torpor. Thus we have Sw. lura, to lurk or lie in wait, also to take a nap, to doze ; ON. lura, to be sluggish, to doze (Haldorsen) ; Pl.D. luren, to be slow and listless. Again, G. lauschen, OHG. losgen, losken, to listen, lie in wait ; im bette lauschen, to slug it abed.— Küttn. Bav. lauschen, to act lazily, to loiter. Dan. luske, to skulk about ; Fin. luoska, a sloven, slut. See Lurk.
Lust.—Lusty. Goth. lustus, will, desire. See List. Lusty, Dan. lystig, G. lustig, merry, jovial ; Wall. lustih, quick, lively ; It. lesto, agile.
Lustre.—Illustrate. It. lustro, lustrore, Fr. lustre, Du. luister, luster, gloss, glister, splendour. It. lustrare, Fr. lustrer, to give a lustre or gloss to ; Du. luisteren, lusteren, to glitter, glister, shine. Lat. illustris, clear, bright, conspicuous. The word seems radically identical with E. glister, glisten, to sparkle, shine, Bav. glast, splendour ; Pl.D. glustern, to look at with sparkling eyes, from the last of which we pass to Lat. lustro, Fr. lustrer, to survey. Sol cuncta suâ luce lustrat, surveys, brightens and irradiates.
Lute. I. The stringed instrument, Arab. el ud. 2. A paste of clay to stop the necks of retorts. Lat. lutum, mud.
-lute, -luv-, -lu-. Lat. luo, lutum, lavo, lautum and latum, Gr. λούω, to wash ; diluo, to wash off. Hence lotion, a washing ; to dilute, to pour in water ; diluent, washy ; diluvium, a washing away, an abundance of water, deluge.
Lute-string. A kind of shining silk, corrupted from Piedm. lustrino, a name given on account of its lustre.
Luxury. Lat. luxus, loose, slack, out of joint, whence luxus, luxuria, a giving loose to enjoyment, dissoluteness, excess, profuseness.
Lyceum. Gr. Λύκειον, the name of a public Institute at Athens.
Lye. Lat. lix, lixivium, G. lauge, an infusion of the salts of ashes to soak linen in. Esthon. liggo, a soaking ; liggoma, to set to soak ; ligge, wet, boggy ; Fin. likoan, lijota, to soak (as flax) in water ; liko, place where soaking is done ; Lap. ligge, mud ; Boh. lauh, luh, lye ; luky (plur.), boggy places ; Russ. luja (Fr. j), a pit, bog, marsh ; Serv. lujati, to soak in lye ; Bav. lühen, to rinse linen. Luhhejt, lucre, luhit, lotus, lavatus.—Gl. in Schm.
Lyre.—Lyrical. Gr. λύρα, a species of stringed musical instrument, λυρικός, connected with the same, or with the poetry sung to it.

Macaroni. It. maccheroni, macaroni, originally lumps of paste and cheese squeezed up into balls, but now ribbons of fine paste squeezed through orifices of different shapes. From maccare, to bruise or crush, whence also maccatelle, balls of mince-meat; macca, beans boiled to a mash. From macaroni being considered the peculiar dish of the Italians, the name seems to have been given to the dandies or fine gentlemen of the last century, when the accomplishment of the Italian tour was the distinction of the young man of fashion. The meaning of Macaronic poetry is thus explained by Merlinus Coccaius, who was apparently the inventor of the name. Ars illa poetica nuncupatur Ars macaronica, a macaronibus derivata, qui macarones sunt quoddam pulmentum, farina, caseo, butyro compaginatum, grossum, rude, et rusticanum. Ideo macaronica nil nisi crassedinem, ruditatem et vocabulazzos debet in se continere.—Preface to the Macaronics. Fr. macaronique, a macaronick, a confused heap or huddle of many separate things.—Cot.

Mace. It. mazza, any kind of beetle, mallet, or club, with a knob or head at the end, a Serjeant's mace; mazzo, a bunch, cluster, packet; Fr. masse, a lump, round piece of anything, a club; masse d'eau, herbe à masses, reed-mace, typha.

Macerate. Lat. macerare, to make to waste away, to soften by soaking; macer, lean, wasted.

Machine. Lat. machina. See Mechanic.

Mackarel. Fr. maquereau. It. maccarello, from the dark blotches with which the fish is marked; It. macco, a mark as of a bruise; maccola, macchia, a spot, stain; Sp. maca, bruise in fruit, spot, stain; Venet. macar. It. ammaccare, to bruise. In the application of the term to a pander there is a confusion with Du. maeckelaer, a broker, matchmaker, properly one skilled in pointing out the blemishes of the goods in which he deals, from maeckel, a spot or blemish. See Broker.

Mad. To mad, to rave, wander, be beside oneself. Sufficeth thee, but if thy wittes mad, To have as gret a grace as Noe had.—Chaucer. Maddyn or dotyn, desipere.—Pr. Pm. The origin is the confused incoherent talk of mad people. Swiss madeln, to mutter, mäddelen, Bav. maden, schmadern, to tattle, chatter; E. to maddle, to rave, be delirious, confused in intellect, to lose one's way. ' As soon as I gat to t' moor I began to maddle.' Maddlin, a blockhead, confused, foolish person.—Craven. Gl. Du. mallen, to toy, to rave; malen, to muse, to dote; mal, foolish, silly, mad. A similar train of thought is found in Swiss mauseln, to mutter, speak unintelligibly; N. masa, to tattle, also (as Du. malen) to tease or deave some one with importunity; masast, to doze, to begin to dream; E. mazle, to wander as if stupefied—Hal.; mazzle, to trifle, to do a thing unskilfully; mazzlin, trifling.—Craven. Gl. See Maze. It. matto, foolish, mad, stands alone in the Romance languages.

Madrigal. It. madrigale, madriale, mandriale, Sp. mandrial, mandrigal, a kind of irregular lyric poem, properly a pastoral, from Lat. mandria. It. mandria, a fold, herd.—Diez.

To Maffle. To stammer, speak imperfectly, or move the jaws like a young child. The action of the toothless jaws of infancy or age is represented by various combinations of the labial articulations, ba, fa, ma. Du. maffelen, moffelen, to stammer, to move the jaws—Kil.; Rouchi mouffeter, to move the lips; Bav. muffeln, to mumble, chew with toothless jaws; Rouchi baffier, to slobber; baffiou, one who slobbers, stammers, talks idly; Swiss baffeln, maffeln, to chatter on in a tedious way; E. faffle, to stammer, to trifle; to famble (OE. fameleii), to stutter, murmur inarticulately; OE. babelen, mamelen, to babble, mutter.

Magazine. Sp. magazen, almagacen, almacen. It. magazzino, Fr. magasin, from Arab. al-makhzen, a storehouse, from the root khazana, to store, to keep.—Dozy.

Maggot. W. magu, to breed; magad, a brood, a multitude; magiad, a breeding; magiaid, magiod, worms, grubs. By a like train of thought It. gorgogliare.

to purl, spring, or bubble" as water, and figuratively to breed wormlets or weevils in pulse or corn; whence gorgoglio (Lat. curculio), a weevil or corn-maggot.
Magic. Gr. μαγικος; μαγος, a magician.

Magisterial.—Magistrate. Lat. magister, a master.

Magn-.—Magnitude.—Magnify. Lat. magnus, Gr. μεγας, Sanscr. maha, great. Hence Magnanimous (animus, mind), great-minded; Magnificent great doing, &c.

Magnet. Gr. Μαγνησ, Μαγνητης, a dweller in Magnesia; λιθος Μαγνητης or Μαγνησιας, Lat. magnes, the Magnesian stone or magnet, from having first been brought from that country.

Maid.—Maiden. Goth. magus, a boy; magaths, a maid, young girl; AS. magu, ON. mogr, son, OFris. mach, child; OHG. magad, G. magd, maid, maid; OHG. mag, mach, ON. magr, relation; Swiss mags-chaft, relationship, affinity; Gael. mac, W., Bret. mab, map, son; w. magu, Bret. maga, to breed.

Mail. 1. Chain armour. Fr. maille, It. maglia, macchia, the mesh of a net, loop, ring, from Lat. macula, spot, hole, mesh of a net. E. mail, speck on the feathers of a bird.—B. Perdrix maillée, a mailed, menild, or spotted partridge.—Cot. w. magl, a knot, stitch in knitting, mesh, snare.

2. A portmanteau or trunk to travel with, for carrying letters and other things.—B. Fr. male, a male or great budget.—Cot. Hence mail, in the modern acceptation, the conveyance of the public letters. OHG. malaha. It. mala, Bret. mal, coffer, trunk, case; Gael. mala, bag, purse, husk, shell; maileid, a bag, wallet, budget, the belly.

To Maim. See Mayhem.

Main. Chief, principal. Goth. magan, ON. mega, to be able; megin, strength, the principal part of a thing; megin-herinn, the main army; megin-land, the main land, continent. Magn, strength, size.

Mainour.—Manner. Mid.Lat. manu-opus, the rendering of Fr. manœuvre, was used as well in the sense of actual occupation as of an object in the occupation or possession of any one. In the former sense it is said by R. de Hengham that it is a disseisin 'cum manuopus alicujus impeditur,' when the occupation of any one is hindered. In the latter sense the term was specially applied to goods found in the possession of any one and made the subject of judicial investigation. 'Et MALKIN quod prædictus Dux haberet quascunque bona et catalla vocata manuopera capta et capienda cum quacunque personâ infra terram et feodum prædicta, ac per eandem personam coram quocunque judice deadvocata.'—Charta Ric. II. in Duc. 'Probatores cum manuopere capti,' approvers taken with the goods in their possession.—Fleta. This gave rise to the E. expression of being taken with the mainour, afterwards corrupted to taken in the manner, in flagranti delictu.

'Mainour, alias manour, in a legal sense denotes the thing that a thief taketh or stealeth. As to be taken with the mainour (Pl. Cor. fol. 179) is to be taken with the thing stolen about him: and again (fol. 194) it is said 'that a thief was delivered to the sheriff together with the mainour.'—Cowel in Nares. 'Even as a thiefe that is taken with the maner that he stealeth.'—Latimer, ibid.

See Manure.

Mainpernor.—Mainprise. Mainpernors were sureties, into whose hands a person charged with an offence was given, to answer for his appearance when required. Mainprise, a committal to the care of such sureties. From Fr. main, hand, and perner, prener, prendre, Lat. prehendere, to take.

Mainsworn. See Mean.

To Maintain. Fr. maintenir, Lat. manu tenere, to hold by the hand.

Majesty.—Major. Lat. major, comp. of magnus, as Gr. μειζον, of μεγας, great. Hence majestas, greatness, grandeur.

Make. See Match.

To Make. G. machen, Du. maecken, maken.

Mal-. Lat. malus, bad, ill.

Malapert. Over-bold in speech or action, saucy.

Ne malapert, ne renning with your tong. Chaucer, Court of Love.

Locke uses malpertness. In modern language cut down to pert. 'Pert, saucy or homely, malapert.'—Palsgr.

From Fr. appert, ready, nimble in that he does—Cot.; mal-appert, ready to a fault, over-ready. It. aperto, open, confident, or bold.—Fl.

He sayde, Come I to the, appert fole (saucy fool), I salle caste the in the pole.—Sir Percival, 680.

Male. Fr. masle, mâle, from Lat. masculus.

Malice.—Malign.—Malignant. Lat. malitia, malignus, from malus evil, wicked.

Malkin. A clout to clean an oven. From Mall, Moll, the kitchen wench, on a principle similar to that which gives the name of Jack to an implement used for any familiar office; boot-jack, roasting-jack.
The kitchen malkin pins Her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck, Clambering walls to eye him.—Coriolanus.

Mallard. Bret. mallard, Fr. malard, a drake, or male duck.—Pat. de Berri.

Malleable.—Mallet. Lat. malleus, a hammer. It. maglio, a mallet, beetle, sledge; magliare, to pound, to beat; Fr. mallet, a hammer; mailloter, to pound. Pol. mlot, Russ. molot, a mallet, beetle; molotity, to thresh; moloty, to grind. Illyr. mlat, a flail, a hammer; mlatiti, to thresh, to beat.

Mallow. Lat. malva, Gr. μαλαχη, from μαλασσω, to soften, μαλακος, soft, the herb being still in the East supposed to possess softening virtues.
The mallow—is very much used by the Arabs medicinally; they make poultices of the leaves to allay irritation and inflammation.—Domestic Life in Palestine, p. 323.

Malmsey. Wine of Malvasia, in the Morea. Malvasia, malvatica, Malmsie wine. Candy wine.—Fl. Pl.D. malmasier, malmesien. Du. malvaseye, vinum Arvisium, Creticum, Chium, Monembasites.—Kil. Sp. malvasia, marvasia.
Upon that hylle is a cite called Malvasia, where first grewe Malmasye, and yet dothe; howbeit it groweth now (a. d. 1506) more plenteously in Candia and Modena, and no where ellys.—Pilgrimage of Sir R. Guildford. Cam. Soc. p. 12.

Malt. G. malz, ON. malt. The derivation from malen, to grind, indicates no characteristic feature of the thing signified. Tooke's derivation, from It. mollire, Fr. mouiller, to soak, would have more probability if the name of malt were not unknown to the Latin dialects. But the true explanation is pointed out by Tacitus when he says that the Germans made wine of hordeum corruptum, the process of malting being confounded by them with that of rotting. ON. melta, to dissolve, digest, rot; maltr, rotten; melta bygg til olgerda, to digest barley for brewing, to malt.

Mamma.—Mammal. A word composed of a repetition of the easiest articulation of the human voice, ma, ma, and, thence applied to the objects of earliest interest to the infant, the mother and the mother's breast. Lat. mamma, the breast, Du. mamme, the breast, mother, nurse.—Kil. Fin. mamma, breast, mother. The designation is common in all regions of the globe.

To Mammer. Properly to stammer, thence to hesitate. 'What way were it best for me to go? I stand in a mammering.'—Terence in E. in Nares. Pol. momotad, to stammer, stutter.

Mammet. A doll, a puppet.
This is no world To play with mammets and to tilt with lips.
Swiss mammi, as E. baby, babby, a new-born child, a doll; mammelen, to play with dolls. The E. mammet, a doll, was ultimately confounded with maumet, an idol, from which it has erroneously been derived. Maumet, a child's babe.—Gouldman. Maument, marmoset, poupée.—Palsgr.
O God, that ever any man should look Upon this maumet, and not laugh at him.
O. Play in Nares.
See Mawmet.

Mammock. A piece or scrap. Properly the remnants of eating, what has been mambled or mumbled. 'He did so set his teeth and tear it. Oh, I warrant how he mammocked it.'—Coriolanus. Sp. mamar, to suck, to devour victuals. Magy. mammogni, to mumble, in nursery language to eat.

Man. Goth. man.

Manacle. Fr. manicles, manettes (now menottes), hand-fetters—Cot.; from main, hand.

To Manage. From Fr. main, the hand, are manier, to handle, wield; manège, the manage of a horse; It. maneggiare, to manage, handle, exercise, trade—Fl.; Mid.Lat. mainagium, occupation, actual possession. 'De quibus erant in possessione et mainagio.'—Aresta Parl. A.D. 1257. Thence the term was transferred to the furniture requisite for the occupation of a house, and (in the shape of the modern menage) to the household of the occupier. 'Domes, castra et alia maneria quæ sine mainagio competenti repererat, decentibus utensilibus instruxerat.'—Regest. Parl. A.D. 1408, in Duc. Meinage is still used in Languedoc in the sense of kitchen furniture. Lava lou mainajhé, to wash up the dishes. The erroneous insertion of an s in the old way of writing the word, mesnage, gave rise to the supposition that it was derived from mansionata (mansionaticum), mesonata: The identity with E. manage is seen in the expression bon mesnagier, one who understands the conduct of a household, a good manager.

—Mandate. Lat. mandare, mandatum (manu-dare, to hand-give), to command, commit. Hence Command, Demand, &c.

Mandarin. A Chinese officer, a name first made known to us by the Portuguese, and like the Indian caste erroneously supposed to be a native term. From Ptg. mandar, to hold authority, command, govern. Mid.Lat. mandaria, jurisdiction, dominion.—Carp.
Mandible. Lat. mandibulum; mando, to chew, eat.
Mandrake. Lat. mandragora, a plant supposed to be used in magical incantations. In Fr. still more strangely corrupted, through mandeglaire (Palsgr.), into main de gloire.
Mane. ON. mön, W. mwng.
Mange. An itching affection of the skin in dogs. Fr. démanger, to itch, from manger, to gnaw, to eat, as Sp. comer, to itch, from comedere, to eat.—Diez.
Manger. Fr. mangeoire, an eating place, from manger, Lat. manducare, to eat, originally to chew.—See Munch.
Mangle. It. mangano, a tent-post, mill-post, upright of a crane, press for linen; manganella, a machine for casting great weights, a crane, lever; Fr. mangonneau, an engine whereout stones, old iron, and great arrows, were violently darted.—Cot. Mod.Gr. μάγγανον, a machine to calender linen, a mangle, press; μαγγανοπήγαδον, a well winch or wheel, instrument to draw water from a well. G. mange, mangel, mandel, machine for giving a gloss to linen, calender, mangle.
The word is commonly explained as a corruption of Lat. machina, a machine, or mechanical device.
Machinas jaculatorias quas mangana et petrarias vocant.—Will. Tyrius in Duc. Quomodo id faciant, qua arte, quibus manganis, quibusve instrumentis aut medicamentis.—Duc. Henschel. Mod.Gr. μαγγανεία, machination, plot, device, imposture.
To Mangle. To disfigure. In Sc., without the nasal, to magil, maigil.
Thare he beheld ane cruell maglit face. D. V. 181. 21.
Bot rede lele, and tak gud tent in tyme Ye nouther magil nor mismeter my ryme. Ibid. 484. 30.
Compare magil in the last quotation with mangle in the following: Tyndal shall have no cause to say that I deface his gaye goodly tale by mangling of his matter and rehearsing him by patches and pieces.—Sir T. More in R.
The origin is G. mackel, Du. maeckel, Lat. macula, Sp. mancha, a stain, spot, blemish; Wall, macule, mancule, fault, want; It. macola, spot, blemish; macolo, infection, loss, or prejudice; whence macolare, to dirty, infect, also to abuse, beat, bang.—Altieri (percuotere altrui fortemente—Vanzoni), properly to maul or disfigure him by blows. Mid.Lat. maculare, vulnerando deformare. 'Si labium superius alicujus ita maculaverit ut dentes appareant.'—Leg. Alam. in Duc. Cat. magular, Sp. magullar, to bruise, mangle, contuse.—Neum. Again, with the nasal intonation, Bav. mangel, a fault, defect, bodily injury, complaint, blame; einen mengeln, einen mangel bringen, Mid.Lat. mangulare, to do one an injury.
Johannes B. prædictum Bernardum—de prædicto cultello percussit, quod videns prædictus Bernardus qui per prædictum Johannem mangulatus erat.—Litt. remiss. A.D. 1361 in Carp.
Piedm. mangojé, to mangle, spoil by rough usage.
E. maul, to disfigure by ill-treatment, is an expression of precisely the same meaning, from G. mahl, Sc. mail, E. mole, a spot; Sc. mail, to discolour, stain.
Indeed, it is probable that mahl and mackel may spring from different modifications of the same root.
Maniac. Gr. μανία, madness; μαίνομαι, to be mad.
Manifest. Lat. manifestus, evident, open to observation, that may be laid hold of by hand. Scelus manifestum ac deprehensum.—Cic. The signification of -festus in the word is clear enough, although its origin is not explained satisfactorily.
Manipulate. Lat. manipulus, a handful, bundle, company.
Manner. It. maniero, from manarius, for manuarius, manageable, that may be handled; maniera, Fr. manière, the handling of a thing, way of dealing with it, course of proceeding.—Diez.
Manor. Mid.Lat. mansus, mansum, a residence, from manere, to remain, to dwell; 'in cujus pago manet.'—Leg. Salic. Prov. maner, OFr. manoir, dwelling-place, mansion, the dwelling-place of the lord of a feudal estate, hence the estate itself.—Diez.
Manse.—Mansion. Lat. maneo, mansum, to abide, wait, remain or continue.
Mantle. It. manto, ammanto, a cloak; Fr. mante, a covering; manteau, Lat. manteluni, mantellum, a cloak.
Manu-.—Manual. Lat. manus, the hand, manualis, of or belonging to the hand.
Manure.—Manœuvre. Fr. manouvrer (manu operare), to hold, occupy, possess.—Cot. Hence OE. manure, to occupy or cultivate land, in modern times confined to the single operation of laying on dung or substances adapted to give fertility.
The first manured Western isle By Cham and Japhet's race.
Warner, Albion's Engl.
The commonwealth or policie of England is governed, administered, and manured by three sorts of persons.'—Smith, Commonwealth in R.
Fr. manouvrier, an artificer, handicraftsman.—Cot. 'Ut illi coloni—non denegent carropera et manopera ex antique, consuetudine,' car work and hand work.—Edict. Car. Calv.
Many. Goth. manags, much, managei, a multitude; G. mancher, Fr. maint, many; Russ. mnogii, Boh. mnohy, Illyr. mlogi, much, numerous; in the last of which we have perhaps the explanations of Lat. multus. Fin. moni, Esthon. monni, Lap. madde, many.
Map. Lat. mappa, a table-cloth; mappa-mundi, a delineation of the earth on a cloth. 'Mapa, togilla (a towel); mapa etiam dicitur pictura vel forma ludorum, unde dicitur Mapa mundi.'—Papias. 'Considerantes quod ipsa pictorum varietas mendaces efficit de locorum varietate picturas, quas Mappam mundi vulgus nominat.'—Gervase of Tilbury in Duc.
To Mar. The usual sense of defacing or spoiling may probably be derived from the figure of a person wrying his mouth, making ugly faces, os distorquens, depravans, deturpans.
The knave crommeth his croppe er the cock crowe, He momeleth ant moccheth ant marreth his mouth.—Political Songs, Cam. Soc.
Now it is shown under Mock and Mould that the terms signifying wilful distortion of the face are commonly taken from the muttering; or grumbling sounds of a person or animal in a bad temper. We may accordingly derive the marring of the mouth from Swab. marren, to growl angrily, as dogs or cats, to quarrel in loud and angry tones. Hence also may be explained Prov. and Fr. marrir, to complain. 'Laquelle servante trouva que il lui defailloit une dariole—et pour ce que elle en faisoit noise et grant marison (she made outcry and great lamentation), lediz M. son frere oyant ces paroles et grans marremens, &c.'—Litt. Remiss., A.D. 1385, in Carp. Marri, angry, fretting, discontented, vexed at, aggrieved, afflicted,
MARAUDER. sorry, sad.—Cot. The term is then applied to what produces lamentation, viz. ill-usage, affliction, trouble. 'Guillaume H. dist à l'exposant moult arrogamment, Garson, t'en faut-il parler? et se plus en parloit qu'il le marriroit,' that if he said any more of it he would give him something to complain of.—Litt. Remiss., A.D. 1390, in Carp.
The E. mar is often used in the same sense.
For if thou knew him, out of doute Lightly thou shouldest scapen out Of thy prison that marreth thee.
Chaucer, R. R.
The signification then passes on to the idea of disturbance, hindrance, delay, defeat of a purpose, misleading, bringing to nothing. 'Et ipse pacifico animo donat illi commeatum, tantum ut ipsi et in suo regno vel suis fidelibus aliquod damnum aut aliquam marritionem non faciat,' provided that he should do no damage or mischief, should give no cause of complaint to him or his subjects.—Cap. Car. Calv. in Duc. 'Post obitum meum absque ulla marritione ad dictum monasterium firmiter pertineant,' without any disturbance.—Goldast. ibid. 'Absque ulla marritione vel dilatione reddere faciant,' should pay without dispute or delay.—Cap. Car. Mag. in Duc. 'Et nemo per ingenium suum vel astutiam praescriptam legem—marrire audeat vel praevaleat,' should obstruct or make the law of none effect.—Ibid. 'Ut nullus bannum vel praeceptum Domni Imperatoris—in nullo marrire praesumat, neque opus ejus stricare vel minuere vel impedire—et ut nemo debitum suum vel censum suum marrire ausus sit,' make difficulties about.—Ibid. OHG. marrjan, gamarrjan, to hinder, make void. Bimartez, irritum fecistis (mandatum); farmarrit, irritum, sine effectu; marrisal, laesio, impedimentum; merriseli dera siaigon, impediment of speech.—Graff. Du. merren, to obstruct, delay, entangle; merren-tacken, lime twigs for entangling birds.
The sense of going astray, losing the way, is derived from the troubled state of one confounded with affliction. OFr. esmarri, afflicted, overwhelmed, troubled, astonished.—Roquef. It. marrire, to go out of one's wits through fear or amazement, to miscarry as letters do, to stray.—Fl. OFr. marrir chemin, to lose the way; Lang. mari, strayed, lost. AS. mearrian, to go astray.
Marauder. Fr. maraud, a rogue, beggar, vagabond, knave; marauder to beg, play the rogue—Cot. ; marauder, marander, chercher à escroquer, chercher de quoi vivre ; marandaille, troop of beggars.—Roquef.
Perhaps the latter mode of spelling may indicate the true origin, from It. me-renda, OFr. marande, a luncheon ; one who goes about looking for prog. Wa-lach. merende, provisions for the way ; merendare, a knapsack.

Marble. Lat. marmor, Fr. marbre, Du. marmer, marble ; marmelen, to mar-ble or colour so as to resemble m. ; mar-mel (Wall. marbeul), a marble, or little ball of marbled clay.—Halma.

March. Fr. marcher, to tread, step, pace, walk, to proceed. It. marciare, to march. When the important part of an army consisted of horsemen the most obvious way of expressing the movement of troops would be by a term equivalent to OFr. chevaucher (from cheval), to ride on horseback. Thus we should identify marcher with Manx markee, to ride, from Bret. marc'h, a horse. But Diez asserts that the word is not an old one (a point on which it is mostly difficult to speak with confidence), and therefore cannot come from a Celtic source, and he quotes from Rutebauf the expression 'aller de marche en marche,' to wander from bound-ary to boundary, as suggesting a probable origin of the word.

Marches. The borders of a country. Fr. marche, boundary. AS. mearc, a mark, sign, boundary, limit. Goth. marka, border ; gamarko, confines.

Mare. 1. w. march, OHG. marah, marh, AS. mearh, ON. marr, a horse ; OHG. meriha, merha, AS. mære, myre, Du. merrie, Pl.D. mare, a mare.
2. Nightmare. ON. mara, Da. mare, marerid, G. mahr, Pl.D. maar, moor, Du. nagt-merrie, Fr. godemare, cauchemar, the nightmare. ON. mara trað hann, the nightmare oppressed him. Möru-eldr (ghost fire), Will-o'-the-wisp. Pol. mara, vision, dream, nightmare. Wygląda jak mara, he looks like a ghost. Albanian morea. Boh. mura, incubus ; mury, ghosts, lemures nocturni.

Margin. Lat. margo, -inis, a brink or brim.

Marigold. Du. goud, gold ; goud-bloeme, yellow marigold ; goud-wortel, chelidonium majus, a plant with deep yellow juice. Fr. goude, w. gold, gold-mair, Gael. lus Mairi (Mary's plant), marigold.

Marine.—Maritime. Lat. mare, Goth. marei, ON. marr, w. mór, the sea.

Mark. 1. AS. mearc, a mark, sign, boundary ; ON. merkia, to mark, perceive, signify.
The radical image is perhaps shown in Lith. merkti, to wink, to give a sign ; merkimas, a wink ; akis mirksnis, the twinkling of an eye.
2. Half a pound, or eight oz. of silver.
The word in this sense is equivalent to a measure or a certain amount marked off. ON. mörk, a measure of different kinds ; eight oz. of silver, 48 ells of cloth ; half a pot of liquids. The same connection holds between Sw. mål, a mark, and mål, a measure. So also a nail, an eighth of a yard, from the nails by which they are marked in a yard measure.

Market.—Merchant. Lat. mercari, to traffic ; mercatus, trade, market ; ON. markadr, market.

To Marl.—Marline.—To Moor. To marl, to ravel as silk.—Hal. Marlyd or snarlyd, illaqueatus, innodatus.— Pr. Pm.
The use of mar in the sense of trouble, disturb, hinder, has been already explain-ed. The signification then passes on to the idea of delaying, entangling, binding.
Du. marren-vlichte, entangled locks, ca-pilli pedibus pullorum gallinaceorum involuti, quibus pullorum gressus impe-diri solet.—Kil. Marren-tacken, mistle-toe, from whence lime is made to entangle birds. Marren, meeren, to delay ; mar-ren, maren, to bind.—Kil. OSax. mer-rian, Fris. meria, to hinder, to delay ; mere, bands, fetters.—Richthofen. Du. marren, or meeren, is especially used in nautical language in the sense of Fr. amarrer, or E. moor, to bind the ship to the shore ; meertouw, a cable. In a somewhat different application Du. mar-len (for marrelen), to marl, or fasten the sail to the bolt-rope, whence meerling, marlyn, Fr. merlin, E. marline, line of untwisted hemp tarred used in that oper-ation. Fr. amarrer also is used not only in the sense of mooring, but of marling; amarrer, renforcer les manœuvres d'un vaisseau ; marl-reep, cordes de merlin pour amarrer les voiles aux vergues.— Dict. du P. Marin.

Marl. From Du. margh, marrow, is formed marghelen, to fatten land, to make it more productive, to which effect it was formerly common to spread over it a cal-careous earth, thence called marghel, marl, terra adeps sive medulla. —Kil.

Marmelade. A confection, originally of quinces ; Ptg. marmelada, from mar-melo, a quince, and that from Mid.Lat. malomellum, melimelum, Gr. μελίμηλον

(μἐλι, honey, μῆλον, apple), a sweet apple.
Marmoset. A monkey, from his chattering cry. Bret. marmouz, Fr. marmot, marmoset, a monkey ; marmotter, to mutter. Sp. marmotear, to jabber.
Marmot. It. marmotta, marmontana, OHG. muremunti, murmenti, Swiss murmet, murmentli. Diez approves of the derivation from mus montanus, but the G. murmel-thier doubtless points out the true derivation in Fr. marmotter, to mutter.—Adelung. Another Swiss name of the marmot is mungg, munk, from munggen, munken, to mutter.
Maroon, 1. A negro escaped to the woods. Sp. cimaron, Ptg. cimarrao (in America and the W. Indies), of men or animals that have taken to the woods and run wild. Perhaps from sima, a cave, as taking refuge in caves. The fugitive negroes are mentioned under the name of Symarons in Hawkins' Voyage, § 68, where they are said to be settled near Panama.
I was in the Spanish service some twenty years ago in the interior of Cuba, and negro cimarrón, or briefly cimarrón, was then an every-day phrase for fugitive or outlawed negroes hidden in the woods and mountains.—N. & Q. Jan. 27. 1866.
2. The colour of a chestnut, Fr. marron.
Marque—Letters of. Mid.Lat. marcha, Fr. marque, is commonly explained as an authority given by a prince to any of his subjects, who have been wronged by those of a neighbouring sovereign, and have not been able to obtain justice at his hands, to pass the marches or boundaries of his states and do themselves right upon any of his subjects or their property. But probably this is not the exact mode in which the expression is connected with the notion of marches or borders. Marca or marchatio seems to have been an elliptical expression for a borderer's quarrel, in which sense the latter term is used in a letter of James of Aragon to Philip le Bel, A.D. 1310. ' Cupientes attamen, ut semper fecimus, evitare pro posse, ne inter nostros et vestros subditos, marchationes quæ scandali ac dissentionis possent materiam suscitare, aliquatenus orirentur.'—Carp. By a similar ellipse marcare seems to be taken for the right of pasturing in a conterminous forest. ' Sciendum quod in nemore de Lantagio non poterunt dicti fratres marcare'—Carp. Marchagium or droit de marchage in Auvergne was the right of pasturage in the opposite marches. Marcare or marchiare then may easily have come to signify to exercise border right, to do oneself right in a border-quarrel by seizing the property or the persons of countrymen of the wrong-doer— ' Lesquels habitans n'ayant voulu tenir et payer ledit accord, le prestre s'en retourna aux Anglois et fit par iceulx Anglois marquer, piller et prendre prisonniers les bonnes gens de laditte paroisse.'—Litt. Remiss. A. D. 1389 in Carp. ' Bernardus nobis supplicavit ut nos sibi licentiam marcandi homines et subditos de regno Portugalliæ et bona eorum per terram et marem ubicunque eos et bona eorum invenire possit concederemus, quousque de sibi ablatis integram habuisset restitutionem.'—Lit. Ed. iii. A.D. 1295, in Rymer ii. 69.
The authority for exercising this right of reprisal was called letters of Marque, sometimes corruptly written Mart, as if giving a market for the disposal of prizes taken from the enemy.
There was a fish taken, A monstrous fish with a sword by his side—And letters of mart in's mouth from the Duke of Florence.—B. and F., Wife for a Month.
Marquess.—Marchioness. Fr. marquis. It. marchese, G. markgraf, originally, count of the marches or border territories.
Marram. The bents and grass that grow in the sea-sand and bind it together. N. maralm, for mar-halm, ON. mar-halmr, sea-grass, zostera, &c. Halmr, straw, haulm.
Marrow, 1. ON. mergr, Dan. marg, marv, Du. margh, mergh, G. mark. Perhaps from its tender friable structure. E. dial. merowe, delicate ; AS. mearu, merwe, Pl.D. moer, Du. mœrw, Fr. mur, tender, soft, delicate ; ON. mör, fat, lard, tallow ; meria, mardi, to bruise, pound ; N. maren, decayed ; marna, to decay.
2. A mate, companion, fellow ; a rogue.—B.
Marry. Properly of women, to join to a husband, Fr. mari, Lat. maritus.
Marry ! ' Marry [oath], per Mariam.' Coles.
Marsh. Fr. mare, a pool, pond, standing water ; marais, OE. mareis, a marsh ; Du. maerasch, moerasch, marsh ; It. marese, maresco, any moorish or fenny place ; maroso, fenny, full of bogs, puddles, plashes, or rotten waters. Omnis congregatio aquarum, sive salsæ sint, sive dulces, abusive maria nuncupantur.—Isidore in Diez. E. mere, a piece of water. See Moor, 2.
Marshal. Mid.Lat. marescalcus, the master of the horse, from OG. mahre, a horse, and schalk, a servant, a word which in later times has, like its synonym knave, come to be used in an opprobrious sense. Remains of the ancient significa- tion are preserved in Fr. maréchal, a blacksmith, shoer of horses.
The marshal was the officer under whose cognizance fell everything pertain- ing to the use of arms, the regulation of tournaments, &c. Hence to marshal, to place in order. See Constable.
Marsupial. Gr. μαρσύπιον, a small bag.
Mart. Contracted from market. Swiss marcht, mart, market; marten, to traffic.
Martial. Lat. Mars, the god of war, war itself.
Martin.—Martlet. Several kinds of bird are named after St Martin. Fr. martin-pêcheur, a kingfisher; oiseau de St Martin, the ringtail, a kind of hawk; martinet, Piedm. martlèt, a swift (Lat. apus), a bird with very small feet, whence martlet, in heraldry, a bird represented without feet. E. martin is applied to the swallowkind in general. The same con- version of n to l, as in martlet, is seen in Martlemas for Martinmas, the feast of St Martin.
Martyr. Gr. μάρτυρ, a witness.
Marvel. Fr. merveille, It. maraviglia, from Lat. mirabilia, wonderful things.— Diez.
Masculine. Lat. masculinus; mas, a male.
To Mash. Lat. masticare, Sp., Ptg. masticar, mascar, Prov. mastegar, maschar, machar, Fr. mascher, mâcher, to chew; Lim. motsa, to pound, crush, bruise, mince; Wall. machi, mahi, to mix; Walach. mestecà, to chew, to mix; Lang. maca, machuga, to bruise, to chew; Swab. motzen, to dabble in water; Bav. märtschen, matschen, to quash, mash (potatoes, fruit, &c.); maischen, G. meischen, to stir the malt in hot water; Bav. maisch-botig, mash-tub; Sw. mäska, to mash for beer; Gael. measg, to mix, stir; masg, to mix, infuse, steep, as malt or tea; Sc. to mask the tea. Lat. miscere. It. mesciare, mescere, to mix, mesh.—Fl. Fr. macquer, to bruise hemp, break up the stalk; It. maccare, smaccare, to bruise, squeeze, mash; Prov. macar, machar, to bruise, batter, shatter.
Mask. The origin of a mask seems to be the nurse covering her face, as in the game of bo-peep, to frighten the infant. The hidden object of terror behind the mask or screen gives rise to the notion of a ghost or bugbear, and hence it is that MASK mask and ghost are so frequently designated by the same word. Lat. larva, a mask, also a ghost or noxious spirit; G. mumme, a mask, mummel, a bugbear; Bav. butz, a mask, a bugbear; ON. grima, a mask, AS. grima, a witch, or female exercising supernatural powers of evil analogous to those attributed to ghosts. In the same way the word mask was used to signify a hideous covering for the face, and also a ghost or witch. Ugutio in the 12th century explains mascha, simula- crum quod terret, quod vulgo dicitur mascarel, quod opponitur faciei ad terrendos parvos. Gervase of Tilbury gives the name to a bugbear or object of nightly terror. ' Lamias, quas vulgo mascas, aut in Gallicâ linguâ strias, physici dicunt nocturnas esse imagines quæ ex grossitie humorum animas dormientium perturbant et pondus faciunt.'—Duc. In the Lom- bard laws Lat. striga, a witch, is ex- plained by the word masca, and at the present day we have Lang. masc, a sorcerer; masco, a witch, a hag; Piedm. masche, ghosts; masca, a witch; mascaria, incantations, magic. With the latter term must be classed OHG. mascrunc, fascinatio.—Schm. Piedm. mascra, Sp. mascara, It. maschera, a mask.
The syllable masc in the foregoing forms is probably identical with the root of Gr. βασκαίνω, Lat. fascino, to bewitch, and possibly with Arab. maskh, changing into a deformed shape, especially men into animals (Catafogo), a most dreaded exercise of the sorcerer's power as well in the East as in Greece and Rome. If we look for the origin of so deeply-rooted a form we may suspect that it took its rise in the simplest way of making an object of terror, by daubing the face with soot. Du. maeschen, maschelen, mascheren, to smut, stain, daub; Lang. mascara, Fr. machurer, Swiss Rom. matzura, matschera, to smut or daub with soot. Walach. maskara, disgrace (blot), ignominy. Pol. mazgad, to daub, soil; maszkara, hideous face, monster, scarecrow.
The same connection is seen between E. grime, to blacken or dirty, Sw. dial. grima, a spot of soot on the face, and ON. grima, a mask, Cleveland grim, a death's-head on a gravestone, church- grim, Sw. kirkjugrim, a church ghost. AS. grima, a witch.
The use of masks in festive entertainments seems to have led to some interchange on the shores of the Mediter- ranean between the foregoing maschera, mascara, and Arab. maskhara (from sakkhira, to deride, make a jest of), jest, sport, also a jester, buffoon, story-teller ; tamaskhara, to laugh at, to jest, also to mask oneself, whence motamaskhir, a mask or masked person ; maskhara, a mask.—Dozy, Mahn. Mod.Gr. μασκαρας, Slovak maskara, a jester. Bosniac maskara, a jest, laughable matter.

Maslin.—Mastlin. A mixture of different kinds, as wheat and rye ; brass, as composed of copper and zinc. The immediate origin is OFr. mestillon (still in use in Champagne), other forms of which are mesteil, and the modern méteil, messling or masslin, wheat and rye mingled.—Cot. From It. mescolare, to mix, with the change (very common in It.) of sc into st.

Mason. Fr. maçon, Prov. massó, OHG. meizo, mezo, steinmezo, G. steinmetz. Mid. Lat. matio, machio, mason. From OHG. meizan, Goth. maitan, to cut, whence meiziras, mezzisahs (G. messer), a knife ; meizil (G. meissel, a chisel), steinmezil, a stone-cutter.

Mass. I. Fr. messe, It. messa, Sp. misa, the sacrifice of the mass, or Catholic celebration of the Lord's Supper. The derivation from It. messa, Fr. mets, a course or service of dishes at table, Sp. mesa, table, fare, entertainment, would correspond more to the Protestant than the Catholic feeling of the service.

The origin of the word seems certainly Lat. missa for missio, dismission, as remissa for remissio, confessa for confessio, and other similar instances cited by Ducange. ' Is qui — priusquam psalmus cæptus finiatur ad orationem non occurrerit, ulterius oratorium introire non audet, nec semetipsum admiscere psallentibus, sed congregationis missam stans pro foribus præstolatur, &c.'—Cassianus in Duc. Hence the words at the end of the service, Ite missa est, you are discharged. ' In ecclesiis, palatiisque sive præstoriis, missa fieri pronuntiatur cum populus ab observatione dimittitur.' — Avitus Viennensis, ibid. The reason why this name was specially given to the sacrifice of the mass was that that service commenced with the dismission of the catechumens after so much of the service as they were allowed to attend. ' Missa tempore sacrificii est quando catechumini foras mittuntur, clamante Levita (the deacon). Si quis catecuminus remansit exeat foras ; et inde Missa, quia sacramentis altaris interesse non possunt quia nondum regenerati sunt.'—Papias. The part of the service at which the catechumens were

MASSACRE allowed to remain was called the missa catecumenorum, while the missa fidelium included the main part of the service in which the sacrifice of the Mass was celebrated.

2. Lat. massa (properly dough), a lump, mass ; Gr. μάσσω, to knead ; Mod.Gr. μάσσω, μασίζω, μασουλιζω, to chew, eat, mumble ; Lith. maiszyti, to mix, stir, work dough. See Mash.

Massacre. Commonly derived from OFr. macelier, maceclier, macecrier, a butcher (Lat. macellus, meat-market, macellarius, meat-seller) ; to slaughter with as little compunction as a butcher his sheep, and this supposition would seem to be corroborated by the form massacrer, used by Monstrelet when speaking of the massacre of the Duke of Orleans in 1407. ' En outre il le retournèrent et si très terriblement le maschacrèrent qu'il fut présentement mort très piteusement.' And if Fr. massacrer were only used in the sense of the E. word there would be little doubt in the case. But massacrer is also applied in the sense of bungle, make bad work, and it seems pretty certain that this signification is taken from the figure of mumbling, inefficient chewing. Thus we have Venet. mastegare, to chew ; mastegare le parole, to mumble in speaking ; mastegare, also, to hack, haggle, cut with a blunt instrument ; mastegare un lavoro, as Fr. massacrer une besogne, to bungle or spoil a piece of work. So It. biasciare, to mumble, biasciare un lavoro, to bungle.

Again, with more or less corruption, Lang. mastriga, to chew ; Piedm. mastrojà, to mumble, chew with toothless gums, also (like the equivalent Lang. mastroulia, as well as Castrais mastega, mastinga, Milan, mastina, Prov. mastrinàr, mastrignàr, Milan, mastrugnàr) to fumble, spoil by handling, crumple. In another series of forms the t of the root masticare is exchanged for a c. Lat. maxilla. It. mascilla, the jaw ; Cat. maxilla, the tooth of an animal, Sp. mascar, OFr. mascher, Castr. maxa (which must not be supposed to be contracted from masticare), to chew ; Castr. maxega, Fr. machonner, to mumble, Milan, manschiugnà, to fumble, Lang. mascagnà, to hack or disfigure meat in carving, whence It. scannare, to massacre, murder. Now the same insertion of the r which we have seen in Venet. mastegar, Lang. mastriga, to chew ; Milan, mastinàr, Prov. mastrinàr, to mumble, fumble, would convert Castr. maxega (pronounced maschega)

into maxegra, Fr. mascliacrer, mascliader, the primitive meaning of which when used in the sense of slaughter would thus, like that of Lang, mascagiia, be to hack or disfigure with wounds, a sense which it plainly bears in the quotation from Monstrelet.
Mast. I. ON. mastr, G. mast. It. masto, mastro, Fr. mât, the mast of a ship.
2. The fruit of oaks or beeches used for fattening hogs. Du. mesten, to feed, fatten, stuff; mest-dier, a fed beast; mest-voeder, fattening food; G. mast, the fattening of animals, the season or food for fattening; mästen, to fatten.
Possibly mast may be a modification of the root pasc in Lat. pascor, to feed, pastus, food; vescor, to eat. W. pasg, feeding, fattening; pasg dwrch, a mast-hog or fatted hog; bod yn mhasg, to be in feeding, to be fed in a stall.
Master. Lat. magister. It. maestro, mastro, Fr. maistre, maître.
Mastic. Sp. almastiga, Arab. mas-taka, Gr. μαστίχη, mastic, from μαστιχάω, to chew, from the habit of chewing mas-tic.—F. Newman.
Masticate. Lat. masticare. See Massacre.
Mastiff. The Fr. must once have had the form mastif, from whence the E. name is taken, as well as the old masty, which is our usual way of rendering the Fr. adjectival termination if, as in jolly from the old jolif; resty from restif. ' If a mastie had bit me or an asse given me a blow.'—Primaudaye, Fr. Acad. by T. B. C. 1589. A masty dog—Hobson's Jests; masty cur—Du. Bartas in Hal. Fr. matin. It. mastino, are formed with a different termination. The meaning seems to be a large dog. Venet. mastino, large-limbed, solid, strong; E. dial. masty, very large and big, doubtless from G. masten (to mastyn beestys—Pr. Pm.), to fatten. Swiss mastig, fat, obese.—Schmidt. Idiot. Bern. in D. Mundart. Mestyf, hogge or swyne (mast-hog), majalis. Mestyf, hownde, Spartanus.—Pr. Pm.
Mat. Lat. matta (in plaustro scirpea matta fuit—Ov.), Pol. mata, Fr. natte, G. matte. Properly, a bunch or tuft of rushes or the like. Sp. mata, a bush, thicket, lock of matted hair; Pol. mot, motek, a skein; motać, to embroil, entangle; It. matassa, a skein of yarn, a lock of hair or wool; Fr. motte, a lump, clod; mattes, curds; mattelé, clotted, curdled, knotty; ciel mattoné, a curdled sky, covered with fleecy clouds; Wall. maton, clot of milk, flower of the snowball tree, knot in wool or cotton, tow.
Match. I.—Make. AS. maca, gemaca, gemæcca, a companion, mate, match; macalic, fit, meet; ON. maki, a spouse, an equal; N. makje, a mate, especially of birds, one of a pair, as shoes, &c., the like of anything. Probably one of the same make or mould. N.E. make, or mack, kind, sort; manmak, mankind. The same corruption of the sound of the k as in make, match, is found in Fris. meitsen, meitsjen, to make.
* 2. Fr. meiche, the wick or snuff of a candle, match of a lamp, harquebuss, &c.; tent for a wound.—Cot. Also mèche de cheveux, a lock of hair. Ptg. mecha, gunner's match, match to light a candle, wick, tent. It. miccio, micco, match, wick. From Gr. μύξα, the snuff or snivel of the nose, which in Mid.Lat. myxa, myxus, myxis, acquired the sense of the wick of a lamp or candle. ' Myxiam ex stuppa amianthi.'—Duc. Lang. mecha (Grandg.), Castrais meco, mucus of the nose, wick of a lamp or candle; Lang. mecheiro, beak of a lamp, part that sup-ports the wick. The analogy between the snuff of a candle and of the nose has been widely felt. Comp. It. mocco, moc-cio, snivel, snuff or end of a candle, tip of the nose. Fr. moucher, to snuff a candle, to blow one's nose. Piedm. moch, snuff of candle, wick. In classic Gr. μύξα was applied to the nozzle of a lamp. From the wick of a lamp the designation was transferred to similar bundles of fibrous matter, as a lock of hair, tent of a wound.
Mate. I. ON. máti, æqualis, sodalis, Du. maet, medmaet, maetken, comrade, fellow, mate. We have at first little hesi-tation in identifying the word with OHG. gamazi, gimazzi, conviva, one who takes food with one, from maz, ON. matr, food, as companion from panis, bread; a deri-vation which seems corroborated by N. matlag, a company at table, convivial party; ON. mötunautr, companion at table. But the short a in ON. matr, meat, compared with the accented á in máti, mate, leads us to connect the latter with máti, Du. maetr, OHG. máza, measure; whence gamazi, æqualis, G. gemäss, con-formable, suitable, meet. Thus mate and meet would be essentially identical, and in effect E. help-mate and help-meet are often confounded. In the sense of one of a pair, however, mate is probably a cor-ruption of the obsolete make. See Match. The term mate, in the sense of com-panion, fellow, is much used among sailors in addressing each other, whence probably the application of Du. maete, maetken (remex—Kil.), to a common sailor, one of the crew, the origin of Fr. matelot (for materot), G. matrose, a sailor. In our service mate is used in the sense of assistant; cook's mate, boatswain's-mate.
2. Check-mate, at chess, from Pers. schach mat, the king is dead.—Diez.
3. Downcast, subdued, faint Him thoughte that his herte wolde all to breke When he saw him so pitous and so mate, That whilom weren of so gret estate.
Knight's Tale.
Which sory words her mighty hart did mate.
Fr. mat, faded, quelled, subdued ; Sp. mate, unpolished, faded ; matar, to quench, extinguish, kill, to slack lime ; Du. mat, exhausted, broken with labour, overcome ; G. matt, feeble, faint, insipid, dull, flat. Ein mattes licht, a faint light. Das bier schmeckt matt, tastes flat. Gael. meat, feeble, soft, faint-hearted. Pol. mat, pale in colour, dim. See Amate.

Material. — Matter. Lat. materies, materia, stuff of which anything is made.
Maternal. — Matrimony. — Matron. Lat. mater, -tris, a mother ; matrona (respectfully), a married woman, a wife. Hence maternal, belonging to a mother ; matrimony, motherhood, the marriage state.
Mathematics. Gr. μαθηματικος; μαθημα, a study, system of teaching, from μανθανω, to learn.
Matins. Lat. matutinus, in the morning, early ; Fr. matin, morning.
To Matriculate. To register a student at the university. Lat. matrix, matricula, a list or catalogue ; matricula pauperum, the list of poor receiving relief, whence matricularius, Fr. marreglier, marguillier, the person keeping such a list, overseer of the poor, or churchwarden.
Matter. In the sense of pus from a sore it would seem to be an ellipse for matiere purulente, an expression of the same kind with matiere fecale, ordure, excrement. ' On dit qu'une plaie jette de la matiere quand elle suppure.'—Trevoux. The ellipse is widely spread, Gr. ὕλη, matter, substance, being used in Mod. Gr. in the same sense of matter or pus ; Sp. materia, Du. materie, pus.
A singular coincidence of sound is seen in Fr. maturer, to ripen, mature, also to matter, to suppure ; maturation, suppuring, growing to a head, resolving into matter.—Cot.
Mattock. Lith. matikkas, matikka, a grubbing-axe ; Serv. motika, a hoe ; Gael. madog, a pick-axe.
Mattress. It. materazzo, Fr. materas, matelas, Sp. almadraque, Arab. almatrah, a quilted cushion, mattress.—Diez. But perhaps we need not seek a foreign origin, and the meaning of the word may be a collection of flocks ; Sp. mata, a lock of matted hair ; It. matassa, a flock of hair or wool ; W. mat, a mat, mattress.
Mature. Lat. maturus, ripe, ready.
Maudlin. Given to crying, as the Magdalene is commonly represented. Hence crying or sentimentally drunk, half drunk.
Maugre. Fr. malgré, in spite of, against the will of ; mal, ill, and gré, will, pleasure. See Agree.
To Maul. To disfigure by ill usage, from ON. mál, G. mahl, a mark, stain, blot, in the same way that mangle is from Lat. macula. Wall. macule, mancule, a spot, defect. To mawl in Lincolnsh. is to dirty, to cover with dirt. Somersetsh. mattles, the measles.—Hal. See Mole.
Maulstick. A painter's stick. G. mahlen, to paint.
Maund. Fr. mande, manne, a maund, open basket, pannier having handles ; banne, a hamper or great basket ; benne, a basket, great sack for corn or coals, bin. NFris. mâujnn, a turf or wood chest. Perhaps from W. mawn, turf.
To Maunder. To mutter, grumble, to wander in talking, to wander about thoughtfully.—Hal. Bav. maudern, to murmur, mutter, be out of temper ; E. dial. maundring, grumbling. Sc. mant, maunt, to mutter, stutter ; Gael. manndach, manntach, lisping, stuttering.
Maundy. The ceremony of washing the feet of poor persons, performed in imitation of our Lord at the institution of the Last Supper, when after supper he washed his disciples' feet, saying, ' Mandatum novum do vobis, &c.' Hence the office appointed to be read during the ceremony was called mandatum, or in Fr. mandé. Et post capitulum ab omni conventu mandatum pauperum sicut in Cœna Domini peragitur.—Orderic. Vit. in Duc. Et per totius anni spatium unaquaque die tribus peregrinis hospitibus manus et pedes abluimus, panem cum vino offerimus.—Petrus Cluniacus. ibid. This was what was understood by the phrase mandatum trium pauperum. The mode of keeping the maundye is succinctly described in the Life of St Louis. En chascun juesdi assolu li rois, lavoit les piez à treize poures—et donoit a chascun d'eus quarante deniers, et apres les servoit en sa personne à table ;—et auscunns de ses chapelains disoient l'office du mandé endementieres que il lavoit les piez aux poures.—Roquef.
Here the monks their maundie make with sundrie solemne rights And signs of great humilitie— Each one the other's feet doth wash. Naogeorgus Popish Kingdom in Todd.
In England the memory of the Maundy is kept up by the distribution of small silver coins called maundy money by the royal almoner on Holy or Maundy Thursday. The writers of the time of the Reformation frequently gave the name of maundye to the sacrament of the Last Supper itself.
Mausoleum. Gr. Μαυσολεῖον, the famous tomb of King Mausolus.
Mauther.—Modder. A girl. 'You talk like a foolish mauther.'—B. Jonson. Commonly contracted to mau'r.—Forby. Moder, servaunte or wenche.—Pr. Pm. Probably one of those cases in which the name of woman is taken from the womb, or distinctive feature of a woman. G. barmutter, OHG. muater, Du. moeder, the womb. The mother or womb, matrice.—Sherwood. Chaucer uses moder for the matrix of an astrolabe. Lith. motere, a woman, a wife. Compare Bav. fud, feminal, also a woman ; fodel, a girl, a daughter.—Schm. It. mozza, a girl, is also used in the other sense.
Maw. Du. maag, G. magen, OHG. mago, stomach ; Esthon. maggo, stomach, also taste ; Fin. mako, stomach, maku, taste. The stomach is the organ to which the faculty of taste is subservient. G. mögen, to stomach, to relish. Du. moghe, appetite ; moghen eenighe spijse, to relish any food ; moghelick eten, to eat with appetite ; moghelicke spijse, appetising food.—Kil. Esthon. maggus, Fin. makia, sweet, well-tasting. The origin may be the smacking of the tongue and palate in the enjoyment of food. Du. smakken, to make a noise in eating. In Fris. macke, to kiss, the sound of a smack is represented without an initial s, as in the Finnish forms maiskia, to smack the lips, maiskis, a smack with the lips, kiss ; appetising morsel ; maisto, taste.
Mawk.—Mawkish. ON. maðkr, Sw. matk, mask, N. makk, a worm, grub ; Yorksh. mawk, a maggot, a whim or fancy. 'As white as a mawk.'—Whitby Gl. Hence mawkish, insipid, with the faint taste of things beginning to decay and breed worms.
Mawmet. The hatred of Mahometanism produced by the crusades made the religion of the Saracens be regarded as the type of idolatry, whence Fr. mahommet, an idol.—Roquef. ; mahumerie, idolatry, idolatrous temple. 'Ont parlé encuntre le autel de Bethel e encuntre les mahumeries de la contrée de Bethel.'—Livre des Rois. The name of Mahomet was better preserved in E. maumetry, idolatry ; mawmed, mamet, mawment, an idol. Mawment, ydolum, simulacrum.—Pr. Pm. A temple heo foude faire y now, and a mawmed amidde That ofte tolde wonder gret, and what thing men betide.—R. Gloucester. 'The sinne of maumetrie is the first that God defended in the ten commandments.'—Parson's Tale. In process of time the word was confounded with mammet, a puppet, originally a doll.
Maxim.—Maximum. Lat. maximus, greatest ; maxima sententia, the weightiest sentiment. A maxim is a principle of the highest authority.
May.—Might. Goth. magan, ON. mega, Sw. må, to be able ; Goth. mahts, G. macht, Swiss mücht, Boh. moc, might, power ; mohu, mocy, to be able ; Russ. mogn, mock, as Lat. valeo, to be able, to be of health ; moguck, strong, mogutd, bodily strength ; Lith. moketi, to be able, to understand. Some of the G. uses of the word look as if the primitive meaning were a capacity to stomach or use as food. Wein mag ich nicht, I cannot take wine, it does not agree with me. Graben mag ich nicht, I cannot dig. Du. moghen eenighe spijse, to relish any food, to like it, to be willing, to be permitted ; moghe, appetite, also power. A similar train of thought is seen in Esthon. koht, belly, maw, and kohtma, to be able.
Mayhem.—To Maim. To maim (corruptly for main), to disable by wounds. Maym or hurte, mutilacio. Mankyn or maynyn, mutilo. Mankyd or maymyd mutilatus.—Pr. Pm. Sc. mangyie, manyie, menyie, defect, fault, maim, hurt. Wal. mèhaim, defect, blemish, inconvenience. 'Li mèhaim d' l'afaire, c'est ki—the mischief of the thing is—.' It. magagna, blemish, vice, defect, putrefaction in fruit, magagnare, to spoil, taint, vitiate, rot (Altieri) ; Prov. magagnar, maganhar, magaynar, OFr. mahaigner, mehaigner. Mid. Lat. mahannare, to wound, disable. Bret. mac'han, mutilated, mu-tilation; mac'hana, to maim.
The foregoing can hardly be distinct from ON. mein, injury, hurt, trouble, fault, hindrance. Da. meen, defect, blemish, hurt; meenlös, innocent, unblemished; meenslaae, to cripple, disable by blows; meenlydt, disabled, crippled; OHG. mord und main, slaughter and destruction.— Schmeller.
The radical image seems to be indi-cated by W. man, menyn, spot, speck. Compare W. Mair wyry heb fann, Mary maid without spot (Richards), with OHG. dhiu unmeina magad, the unspotted maid.
The original root, however, must have ended in the guttural which closes the first syllable of It. magagna and its equiv-alents, and may perhaps be traced in Sp. Prov. macar, It. maccare, to bruise, to batter; Sp. maca, a bruise in fruit, spot, stain; It. macca, a print, freckle, or mark as of some bruise, also spoil or havoc.— Fl. The nasalisation of the root gives Sp. mancha, stain, blot, defect; It., Sp. manco, defective, maimed, imperfect; Fr. manchot, one-handed, wanting a limb; manquer, to want; Du. manck, maimed, lame; mancken, to limp, fail, want; OE. manked, maimed. From the same root, with the addition of a different termina-tion, Lat. macula, G. mackel, a spot, stain; Sc. to magil, to disfigure, and with the nasal, G. mangel, want, defect, E. mangle, to disfigure.

Mayor. OFr. maieur, maeur, maier, the chief magistrate of a town, from Lat. major, greater. Mid.Lat. major domus, the officer in charge of the household; major equorum, the master of the horse, officer in charge of the royal stable; major monasterii, chief of a monastery, abbot.
The majores villæ were persons placed over the other inhabitants to ad-minister the concerns of the township in the name of the lord, analogous to the Starost of a Russian village. ' Ut Pres-byter! curas seculares nullatenus exer-ceant; id est, ut neque Judices neque Majores villarum fiant.' ' Nequaquam de-potentioribus hominibus Majores fiant, sed de mediocribus qui fideles sunt.'— Capit. Car. Mag. in Duc.
The mayors of the communes in France fill a similar place at the present day.

Maze. Incoherent, senseless chatter is taken as the most obvious symptom of a confused or unsettled mind. Swiss mausen, to speak unintelligibly; ON. masa, to jabber, chatter; N. masast, to drop asleep, to begin to dream; E. dial. to mazle, to wander as if stupefied.—Hal.; to mazzle, to trifle, loiter, do anything unskilfully.—Craven. Gl.
Some neither walks nor sleeps, but mazing stands. Hudson's DuBartas.
To amaze, to make one maze, to stupefy.
A maze is a network of paths contrived to perplex those who enter it, and hinder their finding the way out.
The interchange of zzl and ddl, as in fuzzle, fuddle, identifies mazle or mazzle with Swiss madeln, to mutter; maddelen, to tattle, and E. maddle, to rave, talk con-fusedly, wander in thought, miss one's way.
Ye masen, says May to January when she wishes to persuade him that his eyesight deceived him, that his wits were madding.

Mazer. A broad standing cup or drinking-bowl.—B.
The proper mean-ing of the word is wood of a spotted or speckled grain, from OHG. mäsen, a spot, scar; masa, cicatrix; blatter-masen, pock-marks.— Schmeller.
Du. maese, spot, stain, mark; maeser, maser, Bav. maser, bruscus, a knotted excrescence on the boles of different kinds of trees which furnishes wood of an ornamental grain for turners, cabinet-makers, and others.
G. maserle, maserbirke, alder or birch furnishing wood of such a nature.
Du. maes-hout, maeseren-hout, OHG. mazaltra, mazeldera (G. massholder), maple, from the speckled grain of the wood.
Fr. madre, a thick-streaked grain in wood; madrer, the grain of wood to be full of crooked and speckled streaks.— Cot. ' Venderres de hanas de fust et de madre, de auges—et de toute autre fustaille.'— Registre de Metiers, 112, Docum. Inedits.
Here we see cups of ordinary wood (fust) distinguished from those of maser (madre) or wood of speckled grain, but both in-cluded under the name of fustaille or wood-work.
In a deed of the Count of Autun, ' Et anapo corneo magno cum illo de mazaro.'—Duc.
In an account of the royal sideboard, A.D. 1350, we find mazer and cedar-wood used for the han-dles of knives. 'Deux paires de couteaux a tranchier—l'une paire a manches de cedre garnis de virolles et de tinglettes d'argent dorées—et l'autre paire a man-ches de madre semblables.'
But the chief use of the material being for drinking vessels, the Fr. mazerin, mazelin, as E. mazer, is found in the sense of a cup.
Gerbert appelle, Baillez moi cy le vin, Dessus ma table mettez mon mazelin. Rom. de Garin in Duc.
See Measles.

Mazzard. A burlesque word for the head, whence to mazzard, to knock on the head, to brain one. Sometimes written mazer, 'Break but his pate, or so; only his mazer, because I'll have his head in a cloth as well as mine.'—O. Play in Nares.
There is little doubt that Nares' conjecture is right, that it comes from mazer, a bowl. In a similar way It. zucca, properly a gourd, and thence a drinking-cup, is used to signify a skull.
Mead. 1. W. medd, G. meth, Du. mede, drink made of honey and water; Gr. μέθη, strong drink, drunkenness; μῆον, wine; Lat., W. met. Gr. μίλι, Bohem. med, Pol. miod. Fin. mesi, gen. meden, honey; Fin. mesi also, honeyed beer; Lith. medus, honey, middus, mead, meszti, to sweeten with honey, to brew mead.
Mead. 2. Meadow. Properly land affording hay; Du. maeyland, from maeden, maeyen, Lat. metere, to mow. Bret. medi, to cut, to mow; Bav. mad, the mowing, hay-harvest, place where grass is mowed; berg-mâd, mountain-mowing, piece of steep mountain sward; amad, second mowing, aftermath.
Meagre. Fr. maigre, Lat. macer, lean.
Meal. 1. Du. mael, meel, flour, from maelen, Goth. malan, G. malen. Boh. mlyti, W. malu, Lat. molere, to grind. W. mŷl, what is ground or bruised; ŷd maledig, ground corn. 2. The food taken at one time; a meal's milk, what is taken from the cow at a milking. Sc. mail, rent, tribute, an amount of money to be paid at a fixed time. The radical idea is seen in G. mahl, a stain, spot, mark, sign, hence a bound, limit, the time of a thing's happening; ein-mal, once; abermal, again, &c.; zum letzten mahle, for the last time; ON. mál, the time of doing anything, and specially for taking food. Mál er at tala, there is a time for speaking. Morgunmál, middagsmál, breakfast, dinner time; á málum, at meal times. At missa mál (of cattle), to miss a milking. AS. mael, what is marked out, separate part. Tha thæs mæles was mearc agongen, then of the time was the mark past.—Cædm. Mælum, in separate parts; bit-mælum, dæl-málum, by separate bits or deals. Hence piece-meal, by separate pieces. See Mole.
To Mean.—Mind. Goth. munan, to think, intend, will; muns, meaning, thought, intention; ON. muna, to remember; G. meinen, Du. meenen, to think, believe, intend; Lat. meminisse, to remember; Lith. manyti, to think; mintis, to be informed of; menas, understanding, skill; numanyti, to perceive, recognise, observe, be of opinion; Bohem. mneti, to think, to be of opinion; miniti, to think, believe, understand; Russ. mnitsya, to seem; Sanscr. man, to think, to deem.
The mind, Lat. mens, is the seat of the thinking or meaning faculty.
Mean. 1. Low, common, poor, pitiful. All manere of men, the mene and the ryche. P. P.
The origin seems OHG. main, properly a spot, stain. Diu unmeina magad, the unspotted maid.—Isidore in Schmeller. Main, mein, are then used for injury, impure, unholy. Das der aid rain und nicht main sey; that the oath should be pure and not false. Mainaid, meinsweridi, perjury (E. mainswear, mansworti); mein rat, evil counsel; mein sprâka, blasphemy; mein tât, maleficium. Lap. maine, bodily failing, sickness, fault; stuora maine (stuora, great), the small-pox; ON. mein, sore, injury, crime; mein-latis, innocent, without injury. W. man, a spot, mark, place; man geni, a mark from birth, as a mole.
The transition to the idea of common, expressed by AS. gemæne, G. gemein, may be illustrated by the words addressed to Peter in his vision, 'What God has cleansed that call not thou common.' So in Mark vii. 15, Goth. gamainjan, Gr. κοινοῦν, is rendered defile in the English version, while in the Latin it is rendered coinquinare, to stain, in the first part of the verse, and communicare, to make common, in the second.
2. Intermediate. Lat. medius, It. mezzo, mid, middle; mezzano, a mediator, any middle thing, between both, indifferent. Prov. mejan, meian, middling. Als grans, als meians, als menors, to the great, the middling, and the small. Fr. moyen, indifferent, moderate, a mediator, a mean, course, way.—Cot. The means of doing a thing is the course which has to be trod in order to accomplish it, the intermediate path between the agent and the object to be accomplished. The mean time is the time between the present and that when the thing spoken of is to be done.
Meander. Gr. Μαίανδρος, the name of a winding river in Asia Minor.
Measles. A disease in which the body is much marked with red spots. Du. maese, spot, stain, mark; maeselen, maeseren, maesel-suchte, measles.

Kil. Bav. masen, spot, mark; blatter-masen, pock-marks; straich-masen, wheal, mark of a blow; wund-masen, scar. The name of a spot might well be taken from the act of dabbling in the wet, dawbing, dirtying. Pl.D. musseln, Swiss schmus-seln, schmauseln, Du. bemeuzelen, to dabble, dawb; Pol. mazad, mazgać, to dawb, blot, soil, smear.
Perhaps measly bacon, together with OHG. maselsucht, miselsucht, leprosy, OFr. mesel, a leper, are to be referred to a different source. Valencian mesell is applied to one who has an internal or contagious disorder, and especially to pigs which when slaughtered produce measly meat. From the Arab. mosel, consumptive, pple past of the verb salla (to waste away?), applied to animals as well as men. — Dozy.

Measure.—Dimension, -mense. Lat. metior, mensus sum, to measure; whence mensura, Fr. mesure, E. measure; dimensio, a measuring between two points, dimension; immensus, unmeasured, immense. See Mete.

Meat. Goth. mats, food, matjan, to take food, to eat; ON. mata, OHG. maz, food, dish. Bohem. maso, Pol. mięso, flesh, meat. The nasalised vowel of the latter would seem to bring in Lat. mensa, table, as an equivalent form; Walach. masă, table, food, entertainment.

Mechanic. Gr. μηχανικός, from μηχανή, a contrivance, machine.

Medal. It. medaglia, Fr. medaille, in later times any ancient coin, but originally it seems to signify a coin of half a certain value. Obolus dicitur medalia, id est medietas nummi.—Willelmus Brito in Duc. Medalia, en half pennynck.—Dief. Supp. 'Usavansi all' hora le medaglie in Firenze, che le due valevano un danaio picciolo.—Novelle Antiche in La Crusca. 'La buona femmina che non avea che due medaglie (two mites) le quali ella offerse al tempio.—Ibid. Sometimes it is used for half a livre, and indicates a coin of silver, or even of gold. 'Chi e, chi vago tanto d'una cosa,—che cosa che valesse una medaglia, comperasse una livra.—La Crusca. 'Medaglie bianche d' argente.—Ibid. 'Viginti quinque medalias auri.—Carp. With the loss of the d it became Prov. mealha, OFr. maaille, maille, the half of a penny in money or weight. Bret. mézel, mell. 'Bonne est la maille qui sauve le denier.'—Cot. With so decided a signification of one half in value it is a bold assertion of Diez that the cannot be derived from Lat. medius. ON. miðla, to divide.

To Meddle.—Mell.—Medley. It. mischiare, mescolare, Sp. dial. mezclar, mesclar, Fr. mesler, medler, meiller (Chron. des Ducs de Norm.), to meddle, mingle, mell.
Heraut e Guert tant estriverent Ke par parole se medlerent.—Rom. de Rou. — they quarrelled.
The same change of consonants is seen in Lat. masculus, OFr. mascle, madle, male, and in Fr. meslier, E. medlar-tree; Prov. mesclada, Fr. melée, Mid.Lat. melleia, medley, confusion, quarrel; calida melleia, Fr. chaude mêlée, corrupted to E. chancemedley.

Medial.—Mediate.—Mediocre.—Medium. Lat. medius, middle, mediocris, middling, mediator, medialis.

Medical.—Medicine.—Remedy. Lat. medicus, a physician, from medeor, to heal, cure, apply remedies. Hence remedium, a cure or remedy. Gr. μήδομαι, to counsel, advise.

Meditate. Lat. meditari, to study, design.

Mediterranean. Lat. mediterraneus; medius, in the middle, and terra, land.

Medlar. By Chaucer written medle-tree. From Lat. mespilus came OFr. mesle (mesple), the fruit; meslier, the tree, and from the latter, E. medlar. See Meddle.

Meed. Gr. μισθός, Goth. mizdo. Boh. mzda, reward, recompence; G. miethe, hire.

Meek. Goth. muks, ON. mjúkr, Du. muyck, soft, mild; muyck oeſt, ripe fruit; muycken, N. mykja, to soften; Boh. mok, liquid; mokry, wet; mokwati, to be wet; Pol. moknąć, namakać, to steep, or soak; mięknąć, to soak, to soften; miękkí, soft, tender. In other forms the k of the root is softened to a palatal ch; Boh. mociti, Pol. moczyć, to steep, showing perhaps the root of Lat. macerare.

Meet. Fit, suitable, according to measure.
There's no room at my side Margret My coffin's made so meet.
— so exact.—Sweet William's Ghost.
AS. mete, ON. máti, G. maass, Lap. muddo, measure; AS. gemet, ON. mátulegr. Lap. muddak, fit, meet; G. gemäss, conformable. See Mete.

To Meet.—To Moot. ON. mót, á móti, against, opposite; mit-byr, a contrary wind; mæta, Goth. gamotjan, to meet; ON. mót, AS. mot, gemot, a meeting, assembly. Hence E. moot-hall, a court hall, place of assembly ; to moot a question, to discuss it as in an assembly.
As the ultimate meaning of opposite is face to face, and to meet is to come face to face, the origin may be indicated in Lap. muoto, countenance, face, a root which will again be found doing important duty under Moote. In like manner Fin. nenä, nose ; nendita, to meet.
Megrim. A pain in the head, supposed to arise from the biting of a worm. Emigraneus, vermis capitis, Angl. the mygrine, or the head-worm.—Ortus in Pr. Pm. Hence, as caprices were also supposed to arise from the biting of a maggot, the name of megrim was also given to any capricious fancy.
The origin of the word is Gr. ἡμικρανία, pain affecting one half of the head ; κρανίον, skull.
Meiny.—Menial. Fr. mesnie, a meiny, family, household, company, or servants.—Cot. It. masnada, a troop of soldiers, a company, a family.—Altieri.
The word is very variously written in OFr. maisgnée, maignée, maisgnie, maisnie, mainie, mesnie, menie, &c. It is derived by Diez from Lat. mansio. It. magione, Fr. maison, as if through a form magionata, Fr. maisonnée, in the sense of houseful or household. And this derivation would seem corroborated by forms like Prov. maisonier, OFr. maisonier, masnier, mesnier, the tenant of a hired house ; ménage, menage, housekeeping, household.
On the other hand Lat. minus natus (for minor nati) gives rise to OFr. mainsné, maisné, younger child, Piedm. masnà, Lang. meina, a boy, child. For the loss of the n in minus compare Ptg. menoscabo, mascabo, diminution, Sp. menospreciar, Fr. mépriser, to depreciate. From the forms masnà, meina, we are led to Cat. masnada, mainada, Lang. mainada, Prov. mainada, family, properly assemblage of children, then household servants. ' Oquelo fenno o bien souen de so mainado:' that woman takes good care of her children. ' Oquel home o de bravo mainado:' that man has pretty children.—Beronie. ' Céo sunt les mesnés Noe solun les poeples et lour nacions.—Uæ familiæ Noe juxta populos et nationes suas :' these are the generations of Noah. From the children of a family to the dependants and servants is an easy step in signification. ' Avint issi que Absalon encuntrád la maigníe David ;' accidit autem ut occurreret Absalom servis David.—Livre des Rois. Tal senhor, tal mainada (Rayn.) ; tel seigneur, tel mesnée (Cot.) : like master, like man.
Melancholy. Gr. μελαγχολία, from μέλας, black, and χολή, bile.
Melasses. Sp. melaza, the dregs of honey, also treacle, or the drainings of sugar ; melote, conserve made with honey, molasses, or treacle.
Meliorate. Lat. melior, better.
Mellow. Thoroughly ripe, and hence freed from all harshness or asperity, gratifying to the senses of taste, sight, or hearing. G. (Westerwald) moll, soft, ripe ; (Fallersleben) mollich, mellow, on the point of rotting.—D. M. V. The radical meaning is a degree of ripeness approaching to dissolution. Mellow, or almost rotten ripe.—Fl. in v. Mezzo. Du. molen, meluwen, to decay—Kil. ; molauuenten, tabescentibus (membris)—Schmeller. To decay is to fall away to bits. Bav. melw, melo, melb, meal, powder ; milben, milwen, to reduce to powder ; gemilbet salz, powdered salt ; Goth. malwjan, ON. molva, to break small. With the final b or w exchanged for m, G. malm, dust, powder ; Du. molm, dust of wood or turf; molmen, to moulder away, to decay ; E. dial. maum (for malm), soft, mellow, a soft, friable stone ; Manx mholm, to moulder, make friable ; mhollim, mhollmey, friable, ready to fall to pieces, (of fruit) mellow ; Pl.D. müll, anything reduced to powder ; müllig, powdery (of earth), mellow. Dat land is to müllig, too loose.—Danneil. Du. mollig, soft, mellow in taste ; G. molsch, Fr. mou, molle, mellow, over-ripe ; w. mallu, to rot.
Melody. Gr. μελῳδία, from ᾠδή, song, and μέλος, sweet sound, music ; the latter doubtless from μέλι, honey. Gael. milis, sweet, musical ; mil, honey.
To Melt. Gr. τήλω, to melt, make liquid ; ON. melta, to digest, make rotten ; smelta, Du. smelten, to melt ; Du. meluwen, molen, AS. molsnian, to rot. The ideas of melting and rotting coincide in the fact that the object falls insensibly away from a solid state. See Mellow.
Member. Lat. membrum.
Membrane. Lat. membrana, the thin skin of anything, parchment.
Memory. — Memoir. — Remember. Lat. memini, meminisse, to remember ; memor (for mnemor), mindful, remembering. Gr. μνάομαι, to think on, of which the perfect μέμνημαι is used like memini in the sense of I remember ; μνήμων (corresponding to memor), mindful.

the same source with mens, mentis, and E. mind.
Menace. Fr. menace, It. minaccia, Lat. minæ, minacia, threats.
To Mend. Lat. emendare, to take away a fault, menda. Milanese mendà, It. rimendare, to mend or darn clothes.
Mendacious. Lat. mendax, mendacis, false, lying ; mentior, -iri, to lie.
Mendicant. Lat. mendicans.
Menial. Belonging to the meiny. OFr. maisnier, one of the mesnée, meiny, or household.—Carp. See Meiny.
Menneld or Meanelled. Menneld, speckled, as a horse or thrush ; meanels, small black or red spots in a horse of a lightish colour. W. man, a spot ; menyn, a small spot.—Jones. See Mean, i., Maim.
-mense.—Mensuration. See Mea- sure.
Menstruum. A chemical solvent. Lat. menstruus, of or belonging to a month ; from the notion that chemical solvents could only be duly prepared in dependence on the changes of the moon.
Mental. Lat. mens, mentis, the mind. See To Mean.
Mention. Lat. mentio, connected with mens, the mind.
Mephitic. Lat. mephitis, an ill, sulphureous smell emitted by putrid water or the like.
Mercenary. Lat. mercenarius, hired, retained for pay ; merces, pay, money made by service.
Mercer. Fr. mercier, a tradesman that retails all manner of small ware ; mercerie, small ware.—Cot. Lat. merces, wares.
Merchant.—Mercantile. OFr. marchant. It. mercatante, mercante, a trafficker ; mercatare, to cheapen in the market, to buy and sell ; mercato, market ; mercare, Lat. mercari, to bargain, to buy.
Mercy. Fr. merci, a benefit or favour, pardon, forgiveness, thanks for a benefit ; It. mercede, mercè, reward, munificence, mercy, pity, thanks. Lat. merces, mercedis, earnings, desert, reward. A similar train of thought is seen in Du. mild, liberal, munificent, mild, gentle.—Kil.
Mere. 1. Fr. mare, Du. maer, mer, a pool, fish-pond, standing water. See Marsh.
2. Lat. merus, It. mero, unmixed, plain, of itself. It may be doubted whether the E. use of the word may not have been influenced by the Du. maar, but, only, no more than. 'T is maar spot, it is but sport, or it is a mere joke. Dat gevegt MESS was maar kinderspel, the fight was but child's play, or was mere child's play.
Daar is maar zoo viel, there is but so much, merely so much.
3. Du. meere, ON. mæri, a boundary ; Fin. maari, Lap. mere, a definite point, mark, bound ; meritet. Fin. määrätä, to define, appoint, determine ; määrä-päiwä, appointed day ; Lith. mēra, measure, right measure, moderation ; meris, the mark at which one aims.
Meretricious. Lat. meretrix, a harlot, one who prostitutes her body for gain ; mereo, to earn.
Merge, -merse, -mersion. Lat. mergo, mersum, to dip in, plunge over head. As in Emerge, Immerse, Submersion.
Meridian. Lat. meridianus ; meridies (medius dies), mid-day.
Merit. Lat. mereo, meritum, to deserve.
Mermaid. ON. mar is often used in composition in the sense of sea. Marmennill, a sea-dwarf ; mar-flatr, level as the surface of the sea ; mar-fló, sea-flea, &c. G. meer, W. mor, the sea.
Merry.—Mirth. Lap. murre, delight ; murres, pleasant ; miirritet, to take pleasure in ; Gael. mir, to sport, play ; mire, mireadh, playing, mirth ; Sc. merry-begotten, a bastard, a child begotten in sport or play.
Mesentery. Gr. μεσεντέριον ; μέσος, middle, in the middle, and ἔντερον, an intestine.
Mesh. The knot of a net. Lith. mazgas, a knot, bunch, bundle, bud of a tree ; megsti, to knit, make knots, weave nets ; magztas, netting needle ; G. masche, a noose, a mesh ; AS. maesce, a mesh, max, net ; ON. moskvi, Dan. maske, a mesh ; Du. masche, a blot, stain, mesh. It is observable that Lat. macula is also used in the same two senses.
Mess. 1. A service for the meal of one or of several. A mess of pottage, a dish of pottage. Fr. més, mets, a service of meat, a course of dishes at table.—Cot.
It. messa, messo, a mess of meat, a course or service of so many dishes ; among merchants the stock or principal put into a venture. From Lat. missus, sent, in the sense of served up, dished, as it was sometimes translated in E. 'Caius Fabricius was found by the Samnite Embassadors that came unto him eating of radish rosted in the ashes, which was all the dish he had to his supper.'—Primaudaye Fr. Academie, translated by T. B. C. (1589), p. 195. It is a curious coincidence that OHG. maz (Goth. mats, Bav. mass), meat, food was used in the same way, ' Do der Cheizer an dem tische saz, und man vor in truoc daz erste maz,' brought in before him the first course.—Schm.
2. Properly mesh, a mixture disagree-able to the sight or taste, hence untidy-ness, disorder. ' Mescolanza, a mesh, mingling, mish-mash of things confusedly and without order put together; mescolare, mescere, mesciare, to mesh, mix, mingle.'—Fl. See Mash.
Message. — Messenger. From Lat. missus, sent, arose Prov., OFr. mes, a messenger, Mid.Lat. missaticum, OFr. messatge, a message. ' Missaticum per patrias deportare non nobis videtur—idoneus.' — Epist. Leon. III. in Duc. ' Dæmones nostra missatica deferentes.' Willelmus Brito. ibid. The insertion of the n in messenger is analogous to that in scavenger from scavage, porringer from porridge, harbinger from harb'rage.
Messuage. A dwelling-house with some land adjoining.—B. OFr. mesuage, messuage. Manoirs, masures logés aux champs que la coustume appeloit ancien-nement Mesuage.—Consuetud. Norm. in Duc.
From Lat. manere, to dwell, were de-rived a variety of forms signifying resid-ence ; Fr. manoir, a manor ; Mid.Lat. mansura, Fr. masure, a poor house; mansio, Fr. maison, a house; mansus, mansa, Prov. mas, OFr. mes, mase, a small farm, house and land sufficient for a pair of oxen. From mansus came man-sualis (terra mansualis, the land belong-ing to a mansus), mansuagium, masua-gium, and masagium, a dwelling-house, small farm, or the buildings upon it. Masucagium, masata, and other modifi-cations, were used in the same sense.
Metal. — Metallurgy. Gr. μέταλλον, μεταλλουργέω (ἐργάω, ἐργάζομαι, to work, labour at).
Metamorphose. Gr. μεταμόρφωσις; μετά, implying change, and μορφή, form, figure.
Metaphor. Gr. μεταφορά, a transfer-ring to one word the sense of another ; μεταφέρω, to carry over, transfer.
Metaphysics. Gr. μετά τα φυσικά, after physics. ' From this part of Aris-totle's logic there is an easy transition to what has been called his metaphysics; a name unknown to the author himself, and given to his most abstract philoso-phic works by his editors, from an opinion that those books ought to be studied im-mediately after his physics, or treatises on natural philosophy.'—Gillies.
To Mete. Goth. mitan, G. messen, Lat. metiri, Lith. matoti, to measure ; mestas, Gr. μέτρον, a measure.
Mete.—Mett. A boundary mark, OFr. mette. ' Comme la ville de Muande soit située près des fins et mettes de notre royaume.'—Chron. A.D. 1389, in Carp. v. Danger. Lat. meta, a boundary stone, especially that marking the extremity of a race ; Serv. metya, a bound ; metyiti, to abut upon ; Russ. meja (Fr. j), Bohem. mez, boundary ; meznik, boundary stone ; mezowati, to abut on.
Meteor. Gr. μετέωρος, lofty, on high ; μετέωρα, things seen or happening in the region of the stars.
Method. Gr. μέθοδος, a way, mode of speech or action ; μετά, and ὁδός, a way.
Metre, -metry. Gr. μέτρον, a measure, a measured line, a verse, metre ; εἰς μέτρα ποιεῖν, to put into verse. From the same root with Lat. metior, to mete or measure.
Metropolis. Gr. μητρόπολις ; μήτηρ, mother, and πόλις, city.
Mettle. Vigour, life, sprightliness.—B. A metaphor taken from the metal of a blade, upon the temper of which the power of the weapon depends.
To Mew. Fr. miauler, G. miauen, mauen. It. miagolare, Magy. miákolni, to cry as a cat.
Mew. 1. A gull, or sea swallow ; Du. meeuw, G. möwe, mew, Dan. maage, ON. máfr, már, N. maase, Fr. mauce, mouette.
Mew. 2. It. muta, muda, any change or shift, the moulting or change of feathers, horns, skin, coat, colour, or place of any creature, as of hawks, deer, snakes, also a hawk's mew.—Fl. Fr. muer, to change, shift, to mue, to cast the head, coat, or skin ; mue, a change, any casting of the coat or skin, as the mewing of a hawk ; also a hawk's mue, and a mue or coop wherein fowl is fat-tened.—Cot. The mew of a hawk (Mid. Lat. mutatorium, muta), a place to con-fine a hawk in while moulting, and thence to mew, to confine, to keep close, 'Domus autem mutæ apta et ampla sibi quæratur et de mutâ quando perfectus est, trahatur.'—Albertus Magn. in Duc. MHG. muzen, to moult, muzkorp, a coop for a hawk when moulting. See Moult.
In London the royal stables were called the King's Mews doubtless from having been the place where the hawks were kept, and from this accident the name of mews has been appropriated in London to any range of buildings occupied as stables.
Miasma. Gr. μίασμα, something foul and polluting, from μιαίνω, to be foul, infect.
Mica. A mineral found in glittering scales. Lat. mico, to glitter.
To Mich. To miche in a corner, deliteo—Gouldm. ; mychyn, or pryvely stelyn smale thyngis.—Pr. Pm. From the same origin with smouch, to keep a thing secret, to steal privily. Swiss mauchen, schinauche, to do in secret, conceal, make away with. Fr. musser, Rouchi mucher, to hide, to skulk. It. mucciare, -ire, to slink away privily ; smucciare, -ire, to slip or slide. Grisons mütschar, mitschar, to slip away.
Micro-. Gr. μικρὸς, small, minute, as in Microcosm (κόσμος, the world), Microscope, &c.
Midden.—Middil. Midding, a dung-hill.—B. A myddynge, sterquilinium ; myddyl, or dongyl, forica. — Pr.Pm. Dan. mögdynge, modding, Sw. dial. mödding, midding, N. mokdunge, motting, metting, a dunghill, from Sw. mök, Dan. mög, muck, and dynge, heap.
Middle.—Mid. Goth. midja, Gr. μέσος, Sanscr. madhya, Lat. medius, OHG. mitti, mitter, ON. miðr, G. mittel, middle ; ON. miðill, means ; miðla, to divide.
Midge. G. mücke, a small fly. Probably from mücken, to hum, murmur, as Fin. mytiainen, a midge, from mutina, mytind, murmuring, whispering. See Gnat. Pol. mucha, dim. muszka, Bohem. maucha, a fly. Du. mosie, meusie, a gnat.—Kil. Lat. musca, Fr. mouche, a fly.
Midriff. The diaphragm, or membrane dividing the heart and lungs from the lower bowels. AS. hrif, entrails ; uferre and nitherre hrife, the upper and lower belly. Du. middelrift, diaphragma, septum transversum.—Kil. Pl.D. rif, rift, a carcase, skeleton. OHG. hreve, reve, belly ; fon reva sinero muoter, from his mother's womb.—Tatian.
Mien. Fr. mine, countenance, look, gesture ; Bret. min, beak of a bird, snout of a beast, point of land, promontory ; W. min, the lip or mouth, margin, brink ; min-vin, lip to lip, kissing ; min-coca, to pop with the lips. In the same way as neb, the beak of a bird, is used to signify the face, and Lat. rostrum, a beak, becomes Sp. rostro, face.
Miff. Ill-humour, displeasure, but usually in a slight degree. G. muffen, of dogs, to growl, to bark, thence to look surly or gruff, to mop and mow.—Küttner. Swab. muff, with wry mouth ; Swiss müpfen, to wrinkle the nose, to deride ; Castrais miffa, to sniff. Snuffing the air through the nose is a sign of anger and ill-temper. G. schnupfen, schnuppen, to be offended with a thing, to take it ill, to snuff at it.
Might. See May.
Migrate. Lat. migrare, to remove from one place to another to dwell in it.
Milch.—Milk. To milch was used as the verb, milk, the substantive. Smolguto, sucked or milched dry.—Fl. A milch-cow is a cow kept for milching. A like distinction is found in the use of work and worche. 'Alle goode werkys to wirche!'—St. Graal, c. 31, l. 284. Conversely, G. milch, milk ; melken, to milch. The primary sense of the word seems to be to stroke, thence the act of milking, and the substance so procured. Gr. ἀμέλγω, to milk, to squeeze out ; Lith. milzu, milzsti, to stroke, soften by stroking, to milk a cow, gain a person by blandishments, tame down an animal. Appmalzyti, to soothe, to tame ; milzikkas, a milker ; melzama, a milch cow. Lat. mulcere, to stroke, to soothe. 'Audaci mulcet palearia dextri.'—Ovid. Mulgere, to milk. Bohem. mleko, milk.
Mild. G. mild, soft, gentle ; ON. mildr, lenient, gracious, munificent ; milda, to soothe, appease ; AS. mild, merciful, kind ; mildse, miltse, mercy, pity ; Goth. unmilds, without natural affection ; milditha, pity ; Lith. myleti, to love ; mylus, friendly, mild, gentle ; meile, love ; meiliti, to be inclined to, to have appetite for ; meilinti, to caress ; susimilsti, to have pity on ; Bohem. milowati, to love ; milost, love, grace, favour, clemency ; Pol. mily, lovely, amiable ; milosierdzie, compassion, mercy, pity. Serv. milye, deliciae, darling. Perhaps the fundamental image may be the sweetness of honey. Gael. mills, sweet, millse, sweetness.
Mildew. G. mehlthau, OHG. militou, mildew, rust on corn. AS. meledeaw, It. melume, meligine, Mod.Gr. ἀλπομελι, honeydew. Goth. milith, honey. It is probably owing to the whitish appearance of some kinds of mildew, as if meal had been scattered over the leaf, that the name of so different a phenomenon as honeydew has been transferred to it.
Mile. Fr. mille, Lat. millia passuum, a thousand paces or double steps.
Militant.—Military. Lat. miles, -itis, a soldier.
Milk. See Milch.

Mill. Lat. mille, a thousand; in Millennium, a space of a thousand years; Millepedes, an insect with a thousand feet, &c.

Mill. AS. mylen, W. melyn, Du. molen, Bohem. mlyn, G. mühle, Gr. μύλη, Lat. mola, molendinum, Lith. malunas, a mill. Lith. malti, Lat. molere, G. mahlen, Goth. malan, Russ. moloty, Boh. mliti, W. malu, to grind; mál, what is ground, a grinding.

Milliner. Supposed to be originally a dealer in Milan wares, but no positive evidence has been produced in favour of the derivation.

Milt. The spleen, also the soft roe in fishes. It. milza, ON. milti, the spleen. There can be little doubt that the name is derived from milk, and is given for a similar reason in both applications. The same change of the final k to t is seen in ON. mjaltir, N. mjelte, a milking; and a name slightly altered from that which signifies milk is given in many languages to the soft roe of fishes, and to other parts of the bodily frame of a soft, nonfibrous texture. Pol. mleko, milk; melcz, milt of fish, spinal marrow; melczko, sweetbread, pancreas of calf; Bret. leaz, milk, lezen, milt. Du. melcker, milte, Fr. laite, Lat. lactes, are used in the same sense, while in G. and Sw. the name is simply fish-milk.

Mimic. Lat. mimus, Gr. μῖμος, a farcical entertainment, or the actor in it, hence an imitator; μιμώ, an ape. It is not unlikely that the mimes were originally identical with our mummers, maskers who go about performing a rude entertainment, and take their name from the representation of a bugbear by masking the face. Basque mama, to mask oneself in a hideous manner; Pol. mamić, Boh. mamiti, to dazzle, delude, beguile; Fris. mommeschein, deceitful appearance. Epkema. NFris. maam, a mask.—D. M. See Mummer.

-min-. Eminent.—Prominent. Lat. emineo, to stand out beyond the rest; promineo, to project, stand out. Unsatisfactorily explained from maneo, to remain. The root seems preserved in Bret. min, snout, nose, beak, mouth, point of land, promontory; W. min, lip or mouth, margin, edge; miniog, sharp-pointed, edged.

To Mince. Fr. mincer, to cut into small pieces; mince, thin, slender, small; It. minuzzare, Fr. menuiser, to crumble, break or cut small; It. minuzzami, minuzzoli, minutelli, shreds, mincings; minuti, pottage made of herbs minced very small. From Lat. minutus, small, although Diez would derive Fr. mince from OHG. minnisto, G. mindesto, least. But a derivation from the superlative seems very improbable. It seems more likely that mince is from the verb mincer, and that that is the equivalent of It. minnuzzare. Gael. mìn, soft, tender, smooth, small, pulverized; mìnich, make small, pulverize; W. mân, small, slender, fine.

Mind. Lat. mens, mentis, the faculty of memory and thought; meminisse, ON. minnaz, to remember; minna, to put in mind; G. meinen, to think; mahnen, Lat. monere, to put in mind; Gr. μνήμη, memory; Gael. meinn, mind, disposition.

Mine.—Mineral. Gael. meinn, W. mwn, mwyn, ore, a mine, vein of metal, maen, a stone; It. mina, Fr. mine, minière, a mine; It. minare, Fr. miner, to dig under-ground; Bret. mengleuz, quarry, mine. Mineral, what is brought out of mines, or obtained by mining.

To Mingle. G. mengen, Du. mengen, mengelen, Gr. μίγνυν, to mix.

Miniature. Mid. Lat. miniare, to write with minium or red lead; miniatura, a painting, such as those used to ornament manuscripts.

Minion. Fr. mignon, a darling, a favourite, dainty, elegant, pleasing; daim mignon, a tame deer; mignot, a wanton, favourite, darling. From OHG. minni, minnia, love; minnon, Du. minnen, to love; minnen-dranck, a love potion; minnaer, a lover; Bret. miñon, friend; miñonach, friendship; miñoniach, love. The G. minnen very early took a bad sense, insomuch that a printer at Augsburg in the year 1512, printing a work of Father Amandi, explains that on account of the unseemly senses in which the word mynn had come to be used, he had throughout substituted for it the word lieb.—Schmid. Schwab. Wtb. The origin may perhaps be found in ON. minnast, Sw. munna, minna, Nassau mundsen, to kiss (Rietz), from ON. munnr, the mouth, as Lat. osculum, from os.

To Minish. Fr. menuiser, to make small; menu, Gael. meanbh, Lat. minutus, small; AS. minsian, to grow small; Sw. minska, to lessen, abate, make small; Lat. minor, Goth. minnizo, less; W. mân, main, small, fine, thin; Gael. mìn, soft, smooth, gentle, pulverized, small.

Minister. One who serves, one in inferior place, from minus, less, as opposed to magister, the person in superior place, from magis, more.—R. Martineau in Athenæum, No. 1417.
Minnow. Provincially mengy, mennous, mennan, a small kind of fish. The form minnow is identical with Gael. meanbh, little, small. Meanbh-bhith, animalcule; miniasg, small fish, minnow. Mennons or mennys is Fr. menuise, fry of fish, small fish of divers sorts.—Cot. Menusa, a menuse.—Nominale in Hal. Mennan is from Fr. minime, least, applied to the smallest in several kinds, as a minim in music, a minim or drop in medicine.
Minor. Lat. minor, less.
Minster. Lat. monasterium, AS. mynstre, OFr. monstier, a monastery, then the church attached to it, large cathedral church.
Minstrel. Lat. ministerium, Fr. ministère, mestier, occupation, art. OFr. menestrel, a workman. 'Yram enveiad al rei Salomon un menestrel merveilleus ki bien sout uvrer de or et de argent—e de quanque mestiers en fud.'—Livre des Rois. Confined in process of time to those who ministered to the amusement of the rich by music or jesting, just as in modern times the name of art is specially applied to music, sculpture, painting, occupations adapted to gratify the fancy, not the serious necessities of life.
Li cuens manda les menestrels, Et si a fet crier entr'els, Qui la meillor trufe (jest) sauroit Dire ne fere, qu'il auroit Sa robe d'escarlate neuve.—Roquef.
Faire mestier, to divert, amuse.
With ladies, knights, and squiers, And a great host of ministers. With instruments and sounes diverse. Chaucer's Dream.
Mint. The place where money is struck; Du. munte, G. münze, Lat. moneta, money, the stamp with which, or the place where, it was struck. Du. munten, to mint, or strike money.
Minute.—Minutiæ. Lat. minutus, little, small, from minuo, minutum, to make less. A minute is a small division of an hour, and a second (minuta secunda) is a sixtieth of a minute, as that of an hour, or a second sixtieth of an hour.
Minutes. The rough draft of a proceeding written down at once in minute or small handwriting, to be afterwards engrossed or copied out fair in large writing. See Engross.
Minx. A proud girl.—B.
Miracle.—Admire. Lat. miror, aris, to wonder.
Mire. ON. myri, marsh, boggy ground; Du. modder, moeyer, moer, mire, mud; moer, bog, peat; moeren, to trouble, make thick and muddy. See Moor.
* Mirk.—Murky. ON. myrkr, darkness; myrka, to darken, grow dark; Boh. mrak, darkness, twilight; mraček, a little cloud; mracny, cloudy; Lap. murko, mist, fog. Illyr. merk, dark; merknuti, to grow dark. Lith. merkti, to wink; uzmerkti, to shut the eyes. To wink at a thing is to shut the eyes to it, to make it dark. Boh. mrkati, to wink; and, impersonally, it becomes dark; mrkáse, it becomes dark, vesperascit, noctescit. A like relation may be observed between Walach. murgu, gray; murgesce, it becomes dark, advesperascit, and Pol. mrugai, to wink.
Mirror. Fr. miroir, from mirer, to contemplate, admire, Lat. mirari.
Mirth. See Merry.
Mis. A particle in composition implying separation, divergence, error. Goth. missaleiks, sundry, various; missadedins, misdeeds, sins; missataujands, a misdoer. ON. mis, á mis, amiss, otherwise than as it ought to be, unequally; gera mis, hoggva mis; misborinn; misradinn, &c., mishár, misdjúpr, unequally high or deep; misleggja, to lay unequally. Thessi vetr misleggst, this winter is unsteady in temperature. Missæll, lucky and unlucky by fits; misgá, to make an oversight; misgangr, a wrong road; missa, to lose; N. í myssen, amiss, wrong; misfara, to go astray. See Miss. w. methu, to fail, to miss; methenw, a misnomer.
It is remarkable that mes or mis, from minus, less, is used in composition in the Romance languages exactly in the same way as mis in the Gothic. Sp. menoscabo, Fr. meschef, mischief; Sp. menospreciar, Fr. mespriser, mépriser, to put slight value on, to misprise, to make light of; mesprendre, to mistake; mesalliance, unequal alliance; It. misfare, to misdo; misleale, disloyal, &c. But probably the use of the particle in the Romance dialects may really have been derived from the influence of the Gothic mis. The Gael. uses mi in the same way; as from adh, prosperity (AS. eadig, blessed), mi-adh, misfortune.
Misanthrope.—Mis-. Gr. μισανθρωπος; μισέω, I hate, and ἄνθρωπος, a man.
Miscellaneous. Lat. misceo, to mingle.
Mischief. Sp. menoscabo, Ptg. menoscabo. Cat. menyscap, Prov. mescap, detriment, loss; Fr. meschief, meschef, misfortune, from cabo, chef, head, end, and minus, less; what turns out ill. Miscreant. Fr. mescréant, misbeliev-ing; mescroire (minus credere) to believe amiss.
-mise. — Demise. — Promise. Lat. mittere, missum, to send, becomes Fr. mettre, to put, lay, set, whence demettre, to put out of, let go, lay down; demis, let go, given over, and thence E. demise, the laying down of the crown on the death of the king; a demise of lands, a making over to another person. So from pro-mettre, promis, is E. promise.
Miser. — Miserable. — Misery. Lat. miser, wretched, in sad plight, pitiful, miserably covetous.
Misletoe. ON. mistelteinn, AS. mistel-tan, mistelta, Du. G. mistel. The latter part of our word is ON. teinn, a prong or tine of metal, N. tein, a small stick, shoot of a tree. See Toe.
Misnomer. A misnaming. Fr. nommer, to name.
Misprision. Fr. mesprison, error, offence, a thing done or taken amiss, from mesprendre, to mistake, transgress, offend.—Cot.
Miss. A contraction from mistress, or mistris, as it was formerly written, not however by curtailing the word of its last syllable, but more likely by a contracted way of writing M^s or Mis. for Mistriss.
Jan. 2. Mr Cornelius Bee bookseller in Little Britain died Novr. xi. His two eldest daughters Mis Norwood and Mis Fletcher, widows, execu-trixes.—Obituary of R. Smith, 1674. Cam. Soc.
To Mis. Pavis on her excellent dancing. Dear Mis. delight of all the nobler sort. Pride of the stage and darling of the court. Flecknoe. A.D. 1669, in N. and Q. 1851.
So Lang. Mas. for Mademoiselle.
To Miss. To deviate or err from.—B. ON. missa, to lose; Du. missen, to fail, to miss. Dan. miste, to miss, to lose.
The original meaning may perhaps be preserved in Dan. misse, to wink or blink; missende öinen, blinking eyes; at misse med öinen, to blink. Then (by a train of thought similar to that which leads us to speak of blinking a question, for slipping on one side, failing to meet it directly) to miss, to fail to hit, to go astray. Blench (from blink), a start, a deviation.—Nares.
Compare Dan. glippe, to wink, to slip, to miss, to fail. Myssyn, as eyen for dym-ness, caligo.—Pr. Pm.
Missal. Mid.Lat. missale, a book containing the service of the (Lat. missa) mass.
-miss. -mit.—Mission. Lat. mitto, missum, to send, cast, throw, whence Commit, Emit, Remit, Remiss, &c.
Mist.—Misle.—Mizzle. ON. mistr, G. mist, Du. miest, thickness of the air, mist; missen, miesten, mieselen, nebulam exhalare, rorare tenuem pluviam; miese-linge, nebula. — Kil. AS. mistian, mis-trian, to grow dim. His eagan ne mis-redom, his eyes were not dimmed.—Deut. 34. 7. The fundamental idea is probably the effect of the mist in obscuring the view, expressed by the figure of muddling water, and the word appears closely related to E. muzzy, in-distinct in outline, confused with drink.
Pl.D. musseln (sudeln), to work in wet and dirt; bemusseln, to bedaub (Schütze); musseln [muuschen—Schütze), to drizzle, mizzle; musslig wäder, drizzly weather, Danneil. When the seaman speaks of dirty weather he is not thinking of the dirt under foot, but of the thickness of the air and dirtiness of the view. So from ON. mór, clay, peat, móa, to dawb with mud; nú móar í fjallit, the hills are obscured by mist or snow. Pl.D. smudden, smuddeln, smullen, smuddern, properly to dabble in the wet, to dawb, smear, dirty; dat weder smullet, idt smuddert, it drizzles, it is moist, dirty weather; smudderregn, smuttregn, G. schmutzregen (schmutz, dirt) mizzling rain. Gael. smod, dirt, filth, dust, driz-zling rain, moist haziness.
Fin. muta, Esth. mutta, mud, soil. Fin. musta, Esth. must, black, seem to be related forms. ' Der wolken dunst und schwarze mist'—Opitz.
Mistress. Fr. maistresse, maîtresse, fem. of maître, master.
* Mite. A minute portion of a thing, anything very small. The ants thrust in their stings and instil into them a small mite of their stinging liquor.—Ray.
Craven smite, a small quantity. Sw. dial. smit, Gael. smiot, a particle. It is probable that mite is a modification of mote, expressing diminution by the thin-ning of the vowel. An intermediate form is seen in Cleveland moit, a small particle. ' The meat was eaten up, every moit : ' There was nowther head nor hair on't, moit or doit,' every fragment had disappeared.—Whitby Gl.
It is most probable that mite in the sense of the smallest possible coin is merely a special application of the gen-eral sense of something very small, in the same way that doit was also used for a small coin. Du. mijte, minutia, minutum, oboli vilissimi genus, vulgo mita.—Kil.

Fr. mite, the smallest of coins.—Cot. The derivation from minute is unlikely, al-though Wicliff speaks of the poor widow casting in ' two mynutes, that is, a far-thing.'
Another application is to the mites in cheese or the like, the smallest of insects, hardly individually distinguishable. Ohg. miza, Du. mijte, mijdte, Sp. mita, Fr. mite, miton, acarus. See Mote.
Mitigate. Lat. mitigare, from mitis, meek, gentle, mild.
Mitre. Gr. μίτρα, a girdle, a fillet round the head, chaplet, the turban of the Asiatics.
* Mitten. Fr. mitaine, miton, a winter glove ; Gael, mutan, a muff, thick glove, cover for a gun ; miotag, mutag, a mitten or worsted glove. The name seems to have come from Lap. mudda, N. mudd, modd, Sw. lapmudd, a cloak of reindeer skin ; Fin. muti, a garment of reindeer skin, a hairy shoe or glove ; Sw. mudd, a furred glove. It may be however that the notion of a furred glove is expressed by the type of catskin. Fr. miton, a cat ; mitouflé, furred like a cat or with cat-skins ; wrapped about with furs or cat-furred garments.—Cot. Bav. mudel, mautz, mutz, the cat, then catskin, fur in general.
To Mix. G. mischen, Bohem. misyti, Lat. miscere, Gr. μίσγειν, μιγνύειν, to mix ; Pol. mieszad, to agitate, stir, mix, con-fuse ; Lith. maiszyti, to mix, to stir, to work dough, knead, to make a disturb-ance ; maiszytis, to be confused, to mix oneself in a matter ; maisztas, confusion, uproar ; Gael, masg, infuse, steep, com-pound, mix ; measg, mix, mingle ; W. mysgu, to mix ; mysgi, confusion, tumult.
Mixen. A dung-heap ; AS. meox, dung, filth ; Du. mest, mist, mesch, dung, litter, manure ; Goth, maihstus, G. mist, dung ; OHG. mistunnea, mistina, E. dial. misken, a dung-heap. Let. mēžu, mēst, to sweep, to cleanse, and specially (aus-misteti) to carry out dung, mēsls, sweep-ings ; Lith. mēžu, mēszti, to carry dung ; mēzinys, mēszlynas, a dung-heap. Boh. metu, mesti, smesti, to sweep ; metla, a besom ; smeti, rubbish, sweepings, sme-tisko, a laystall, dunghill. In like manner E. shard, Swiss schorete, dung, from schar-ren, schoren, to scrape, to sweep out dung ; W. ysgarth, offscouring, dung, from Bret. skarza, to sweep, to cleanse. And see Muck.
Mizzen. Fr. misaine, the foresail of a ship—Cot. ; It. mezzana, a latteen, a tri-angular sail with a long sloping yard un-equally divided, so that a small part at the lower end is before the mast. The poop or mizzen sail in a ship was formerly a sail of this description, but afterwards the part of the sail before the mast was cut off for convenience of management, and it was converted into a fore and aft sail.—Röding, Marine Dict. The signi-fication of mezzana is mean, what lies between both ; perhaps as lying along the middle of the ship, in opposition to a square sail, which lies across it.
To Mizzle. See Mist.
To Moan. AS. mænan, OE. to mean, mene. Swab, maunen, to speak with the mouth nearly shut ; maunzen, to speak in a whining tone.
Moat. Fr. mothe, a little earthen for-tress, or strong house built on a hill ; motte, a clod, lump of earth ; also a little hill, a fit seat for a fort or strong house, also such a fort.—Cot. Mote, a dyke, embankment, causey.—Roquef. ' Le motte de mon manoir de Caieux et les fossez entour.'—Chart. A.D. 1329, in Carp. ' Sans reparcher motte ne fos-sez.'—Chart. A.D. 1292, ibid. It. mota, a moat about a house.—Fl. As in ditch and dike the same name is given to a bank of earth and the hollow out of which it is dug, so it seems that moat signified first the mound of earth on which a fort was raised, and then the surrounding ditch from whence the earth had been taken. Mid.Lat. mota, a hill or mound on which a fort was built, or the fort itself. ' Motam altissimam sive dunjonem eminentem in munitionis sig-num firmavit, et in aggerem coacervavit.'—Lambertus Ardensis in Duc. ' Mos est ditioribus quibusque hujus regionis—eo quod maxime inimicitiis vacare soleant exercendis—terras aggerem quantae pre-valent celsitudinis congerere, eique fossam quam latè patentem — circumfodere, et supremam aggeris crepidinem, vallo ex lignis tabulatis—vice muri circummunire, turribusque—per gyrum depositis—do-mum, vel quae omnia despiciat arcem in medio ædificare.'—Duc.
Mob. Contracted from mobile vulgus, the giddy multitude.
Fall from their sovereign's side to court the mo-bile, O London, London, where's thy loyalty ? D'Urfey in Nares.
Dryden sometimes uses mobile, and men-tions the contracted mob as a novelty.
Yet to gratify the barbarous part of my audi-ence I gave them a short rabble scene, because the mob (as they call them) are represented by

Plutarch and Polybius with the same character of baseness and cowardice as are here described.—Pref. to Cleomenes, 1692.

Mob-cap. Mob, a woman's nightcap.—B. To mab, mob, moble, mobble, to muffle up.
The moon doth mobble up herself. Shirley in Nares.
Their heads and faces are mobbed in fine linen that no more is seen of them than their eyes.—Sandys' Travels, ibid.
ODu. moppen, to wrap up. 'Om te gaan bemopt om 't hooft,' to go muffled up about the head.—Weiland. To mop, to muffle up.—Hal. Du. mop-muts, a muffling cap ; Pl.D. mopp, a woman's cap.
To moble, mobble, is probably a mere variation of muffle, formed from Du. moppen, to mutter, as muffle from the analogous G. muffen, muffeln, to mutter, to speak indistinctly. Gael. moibleadh, mumbling. But see Mop.

To Mock. Fr. se moquer, to deride. The radical image is the muttering sounds made by a person out of temper, represented by the syllable mok or muk, which thus becomes a root in the formation of words signifying displeasure and the gestures which express it, making mouths, deriding, mocking. G. mucken, to make a sound as if one was beginning to speak but breaks off again immediately, the lowest articulate sound, which sound is called muck or mucks. Hence mucken, to make mouths at one, look surly or gruff, show one's ill-will by a surly silence, pouting out one's lips, &c.—Küttn. Pl.D. mukken, to make faces, look sour—Schiitze ; Milan, moccold, to mutter, grumble ; moccd, to make faces ; Du. mocken, buccam ducere sive movere.—Kil. Sp. mucca, a grimace ; It. mocca, a mocking or apish mouth.—Fl. Esthon. mok, lips, snout, mouth. Making mouths is the first expression of displeasure and defiance to which the child has resort. Gr. μωκος, mockery ; μωκιζω, to mock.

Mode. Lat. modus, Fr. mode, manner, fashion, way, means. The ultimate explanation may perhaps be found in the Finnish dialects. Lap. muoto, face, countenance, likeness, image ; Fin. muoto, appearance, form, mode, or manner ; monella muodolla, in many modes ; monen-muotainen, multiform ; Magy. mód, method, manner. ON. mót, image, model, appearance, likeness, condition, manner, mode ; móta, to form. Sw. mått, measure ; måtta, measure, moderation, manner, wise ; så måtta, in this wise. Da. maade, measure, mode, manner, way, moderation.

Model. Fr. modèle. It. modello, a mould or pattern, the measure or bigness of a thing ; OHG. modul, Lat. modulus, dim. of modus, a measure.

Moderate.—Modest.—Modify.—Modulate. Lat. moderare, modestus, modificare, modulare, from modus, measure, mean, proportion.

Modern. Fr. moderne. It. moderno, of late times, from Lat. modo, now, but lately, as hodiernus from hodie.—Diez.

Mohair. Fr. moire, mouaire, G. mohr, sort of camlet.

Moiety. Lat. medietas, Prov. meitad, Fr. moitié, half.

To Moil. 1. To daub with dirt.—B. Properly to wet, the senses of wetting and dirtying being closely connected.
A monk that took the spryngill with a manly chare, And, as the manere is, moilid all their patis Everich after othir.—Pardoner and Tapster.
It. molle, soft, wet ; mollare, to soak, moisten, soften ; Cat. mulyar, Fr. mouiller, to wet.
2. To drudge ; perhaps only a secondary application from the laborious efforts of one struggling through wet and mud.
A simple soul much like myself did once a serpent find, Which (almost dead with cold) lay moiling in the mire.—Gascoigne in R.
But it may be from Castrais mal, a forge-hammer ; malha, to forge, to form by hammering, and figuratively, to work laboriously. Compare to hammer, to work or labour.—Hal.

Moist. Fr. moiste, moite, Limousin mousti, Grisons muost, Milan, moisc, Bret. mouéz, w. mwyd, wet, damp.

To Moither. —Mither. —Moider. Moithered, confused, oppressed with work. Perhaps to be explained from the figure of water made thick by stirring up.
Da. muddre, to work in the mud ; muddret, muddled, troubled, thick. But it may belong to G. müde, tired ; Walser. müadi, weariness ; müadar, tired out with importunities.

Molar. Lat. molaris, a grinding tooth, from mola, a hand-mill.

Mole. 1. AS. maal, mæl, a blot, spot, blemish ; G. mahl, a spot or mark ; muttermahl, a mole or natural mark on the skin ; eisenmahl, an ironmold, as it is written with an erroneous d, an iron-spot ; obstmahl, weinmahl, &c., a spot or stain from fruit, wine, &c. Mahlen, to paint. Lat. macula, a spot.

2. Fr. mole, It. molo, a pier or bank built out into the sea, from Lat. moles, a mass, bulk, and specially a mole in the foregoing sense.
Mole, 3.—Mould-warp. Du. mol, molworp, G. maulwerf, from his habit of casting up little hillocks of mould or earth ; AS. weorpan, G. werfen, to cast.
Molecule. Fr. molécule, dim. of Lat. moles, a mass.
Molest. Lat. molestus, troublesome, grievous.
To Moll. See To Hull, 2.
Mollify. From Lat. mollis, soft.
Mollusc. Lat. molluscus, der. from mollis, soft; mollusca, a nut with a soft shell.
Moment. — Momentous. Lat. momentum (for movimentum), what causes a thing to move ; met. the weight or importance of a thing ; also the passing instant, the least portion of time.
Monarch.—Mono-. Gr. μόνος, only; μονάρχης a sole ruler.
Monastery. Gr. μοναστήριον, a place in which the life of a solitary may be led, from μόνος, alone ; μονάζω, to lead a solitary life.
Monday. Moon-day, dies Lunæ.
Money. Fr. monnaie, Lat. moneta.
Monger. AS. mangian, to traffic, trade. Hu mycel gehwilc gemangode, how much each had made by trade.— Luke xix. 15. Mangere, a trader; mangunghus, a house of merchandise. ON. mánga, to chaffer, to trade ; kaupmanga, to bargain; mángari, a dealer, a moneychanger; Du. manghelen, mangheren, to exchange merchandise, to trade; mangher, maggher, an exchanger of wares; Swiss mangeln, mankeln, to swap, exchange; mangeler, mankeler, G. makler, a broker. Often derived from Lat. mango, a slavedealer, horse-dealer, but it is very unlikely that this term, which has left no representative in the Romance languages, should so widely have taken root in the Teutonic and Scandinavian.
Mongrel. It. mongrellino, of mixed breed. Du. menghen, to mingle, with the termination rel, as in pickerel, a small pike.
Monition.—Monitor, -monish. Lat. moneo, monitum, to advise, warn.
Monk. G. mönch, Lat. monachus, Gr. μόναχος, solitary, a monk ; μονονχία, solitary life, from μόνος, alone, and ἔχω, to keep.
* Monkey. Bret. mouna, mounika, female ape.—Legon. in v. marmouz. It. mona, monna, a nickname for a monkey, an ape, or a cat, as we say, Jack, Pug, or Puss ; monina, monicchio, monkey.—Fl. Sp. mono, mona, monkey. Probably at first a fondling name for a cat. Fr. minon, minet, Castrais minou, mounou, puss, kitten, little cat.
Monsoon. Ptg. monção, moução, It. mussone, Fr. mousson, monson. From Arab. mausim, fixed epoch, appropriate season, feast held at a certain season. In Yemen, says Niebuhr, they give the name of mausim to the four months of April, May, June, and July, in which the vessels sail from India. From the sense of fixed season it easily passed to that of wind blowing from a certain quarter at the season in question. Thus the Arabs of the Archipelago speak of the mousim berat, or mousim timor, the western or eastern monsoon. Barros explains the word moução in one place as signifying season for sailing to certain quarters, and in another as a regular wind.—Engelberg.
Monster, -monstrate. Lat. monstrum; monstrare, to point out, make a show of. Hence Demonstrate, to point out; Remonstrate, to show reasons against.
Month. See Moon.
Monument. Lat. monumentum, something to warn or remind, from moneo, to advise, admonish.
Mood. 1. Du. moed, G. muth, ON. móðr, spirit, courage, disposition of mind.
2. Lat. modus, in grammar, a certain form of inflection indicating the mode or manner in which the meaning of the verb is presented to the hearer.
Moon. — Month. Goth. mena, ON. mana, G. mond, Gr. μήνη, Lith. menu, gen. menesis, the moon; menesis, Lat. mensis, Gr. μήν, G. monat, a month, the period of the moon's revolution.
Moor. 1. Lat. Maurus, an inhabitant of the eastern part of Africa. From Gr. μαῦρος, black. ' Nigri manus ossea Mauri' ' Et Mauri celeres et Mauro obscurior Indus' .—Juvenal. μαυρόω, to darken, blind, make dim or obscure. Mod.Gr. μαῦρος, black, brown ; μαυρόνω, to blacken, to stain; Boh. maur, N. mur, coal-dust; Boh. maurek, a grey cat; maurowy, grey; Du. moor, a black or bay horse—Kil. ; Serv. mor, dark blue. Probably morum, a mulberry, has its name from its dark colour.
Moor, 2.—Morass.—Mire. ON. mór, heath, moor, peat; myri, myrr, marsh, bog, fen; OHG. muor, palus; G. moor, möre, OberD. mür, Du. moer, moor, marshy, turfy ground. Sw. moras, Du. moeras, G. morast, morass.

The Du. moder, modder, moyer, moer, mud, modder, moeder, moyer, dregs, mother or thick grounds of a liquid, and G. moder, mud, mire, mother or dregs of wine or oil, seem to show that the words at the head of the article are contracted forms analogous to E. smoor, from smother, Sw. far, mor, for father, mother, E. slur, from sludder. The ultimate origin is probably to be found in forms like madder, modder, signifying to dabble or paddle, to stir up and trouble the water, to make it thick with mud. In this sense we have Pl.D. maddern, moddern, to paddle in wet (Danneil), Du. modden, moddelen, to grub in the dirt, E. muddle, to dabble as ducks with their bills in the wet, to disturb beer or water.—Moor. Serv. mutlyati, mutiti, to stir up, trouble, or make thick. Boh. matlati, to daub, matlanina, confusion, G. schmaddern, Du. smodderen, to daub, to dirty.

The foregoing forms must, I think, be entirely separated from Fr. mare, a puddle, marais, Du. maarasch, E. marsh, Lat. mare, Goth. marei, W. mor, sea, &c.

To Moor. Du. marren, maren, to tie, to moor; Fr. amarrer, marer, to moor. See Marl.

Moot. AS. mot, gemot, an assembly; mot-ern, mot-hus, a meeting-place, moot-hall; motan, to cite before the moot or court of justice; E. to moot, to discuss a question as in a court of justice; moot-point, a doubtful point, a point which admits of being mooted or argued on opposite sides. AS. gemot, meeting, assembly, council, deliberation. Witenagemot, the assembly of wise men, or great council of the Saxon Kings. See Meet.

Mop. Properly a bunch of clouts. It. pannatone, a maulkin, a mop of rags or clouts to rub withal.—Fl. Lat. mappa, a napkin, was doubtless the same word, and in the w. of England mop is a napkin, also a tuft of grass. Gael. mab, mob, a tuft, tassel, mop; mobach, tufty, shaggy; maibean, moibean, moibeal, a bunch, cluster, tuft, mop, besom. It is essentially the same word with E. bob, a tassel, or dangling bunch; Gael. babag, baban, a tassel, or cluster. Mop is also used for a doll, a bunch of clouts, whence moppet, a term of endearment for a child.

To Mop and Mow. To gibber and make faces. To mop is a parallel form of precisely the same origin and signification as mock. Du. moppen, Pl.D. mupsen, to mutter, grumble, be out of temper; Swiss mupfen, to wry the face, to deride; Gael. moibleadh, mumbling; Bav. muffen, to mutter, grumble, hang the mouth; Rouchi, moufeter, to move the lips; Du. maffelen, moffelen, buccas movere.—Kil. Swiss mauen, mauwen, to chew; macel, muhel, a sour face; mühelen, to make a sour face; Fr. faire la moue, to make a moe or mow, to show ill-temper by thrusting out the lips. Faire la moue aux harengières, to stand on the pillory; Milan, fì la mocca al só, Fr. morguer le ciel, to make faces at the sun or sky, to be hanged.

To Mope. To be silent, inactive, and dispirited. From E. mop, Du. moppen, to make wry faces, hang the lip, pout, sulk. In the mops, sulky.—Hal. The senses of being out of temper and out of spirits closely border on each other, and are manifested by similar behaviour. Mopsical, low-spirited.—Hal. Swiss mudern (originally, like moppen, signifying to mutter), is used in the senses of looking sour, out of temper, of moping like moulting fowls; muderlen, to go about in a half sleepy, troubled way. 'Nor shalt thou thereof be reckoned the more moope and fool, but the more wise.'—Vives in R. E. dial. mop, a fool, maups, a silly fellow; Du. maf, fatigued, dull, lazy. Jemand voor het mafje houden, to make a laughing-stock of one.

Moral.—Moralist. Lat. mos, moris, custom, manner, rite.

Morass. See Moor, 2.

Morbid. Lat. morbus, disease.

Mordant. Fr. mordre, Lat. mordere, to bite.

More.—Most. AS. ma, more; thæs the ma, so much the more; ma thonne, rather than; næfre ma, never more, never again. Mara, greater, more. Du. meer, meest, more, most. Gael. mò, mòr, mòid, great, many, much; mòraich, to enlarge; mò, greater, greatest; W. mawr, much; mwy, greater, more; mwyaf, greatest, most; Sp. muy, much, very; Bret. mui, muioc'h, more, most.

More. Root of a tree or herb. To more, to grub up by the root. Layamon, speaking of people driven to the woods, says: Hii leoueden bi wortes And bi many wedes, Bi mores and bi rotes. Devonshire more, a turnip. G. möhre, carrot.

Morganatic. It was the privilege of the feudatory, among the Lombards and other branches of Teutonic race, to endow his wife on the morrow of the wedding with a limited portion of his fortune, without the assent of his heir, under the name of morgengabe or morning gift :—' quod unusquisque militaris ordinis suae uxori, sine haeredum assensu, nomine dotis erogare valet, antequam cum ea ad prandium discubuerit.' — Sachsenspiegel in Duc.

The word was variously Latinized under the forms morganaticam, murganale, murgitatio. The first of these forms is used in the contract of Leopold of Austria with Catherine of Savoy, A.D. 1310, where he engages 'saepe dicta Catherinae morganaticum assignare ad nostrum arbitrium : de quo morganatico ordinare et disponere poterit.'—Cited from Heineccius, Elementa Juris Germ. in N. & Q., July 16, 1864. Carp. also gives an instance of the use of the word in the same sense.

At a subsequent period the name of matrimonium ad morganaticam, or morganatic marriage, was given to a second marriage between a man of rank and a woman of inferior position, in which it was stipulated that she should only have claim to the fortune bestowed on her by morgengabe, without partaking in the rank, or transmitting to her children any further right to the inheritance of her husband. The word is thus clearly explained in the section, ' De filiis natis ex matrimonio ad morganaticam contracto,' cited in Duc. Henschel. ' Quidam habens filium ex nobili conjuge, post mortem ejus non valens continere, aliam minus nobilem duxit : qui nolens existere in peccato, eam desponsavit ea lege ut nec ipsa nec filii ejus amplius habeant de bonis paternis quam dixerit tempore sponsaliorum : verbi gratia, decem libras, vel quantum voluerit dare quando eam desponsavit, quod Mediolanenses dicunt accipere uxorem ad morganaticam.'

Morion. Fr., Sp. morrion. It. morione, a kind of helmet, perhaps a Moorish helmet, as burganet, a Burgundian one. Du. Mooriaan, a Moor.

Morkin. A wild beast found dead, carrion ; Could he not sacrifice Some sorry morkin that unbidden dies, Or meagre heifer, or some rotten ewe. Bp. Hall in R.

The resemblance to ON. morkinn, Sw. murken, rotten, is, I believe, accidental, as rottenness is not the essential notion of the thing, but accidental death. It agrees exactly with Lat. morticinus, cattle dead of itself ; Boh. mrcha, mrssina, carcase, carrion, hence an old worn-out horse ; Serv. mrtzina, carrion ; mrtza, mrtatz, corpse ; mriyeti, mreti, to die. Fr. morine, carcase of a dead beast.

Morning.— Morrow. Goth. maurgins, G. morgen, ON. morgun, morn. Written morownyng in Capgr. Chron. 45. The radical meaning is probably the time at which the sky becomes grey. The grey of the morning is a frequent expression for early dawn. Walach. murgu, grey ; murgitu, twilight ; murgesce, it becomes dark, advesperascit, incipit crepusculum. Lang. mourghe, black, dressed in black. On this principle Galla bora, to be grey, signifies also to dawn ; bora, grey, thick, dirty ; boru, the morning, tomorrow, agreeing in a remarkable manner with W. boreu, morning ; boreuo, to dawn. Perhaps the ultimate root of the expression may lie in the notion of winking, as in the case of Mirk above explained. Pol. mrugac, to wink ; Lith. mirgeti (flimmern, blinken), to glimmer, where it will be observed, that blinken, by which Nesselmann explains the word, has the senses both of blinking and gleaming.

Morphew. It. morfea, morfia, Fr. morfie.
MORSE. The walrus or sea-horse. Russ. morj (fr. j).
MORSEL. A mouthful. Fr. morceau. It. morso, morello, from mordere, to bite, as the equivalent E. bit from bite. See Mortar.

Mort. A great quantity ; murth, an abundance.—B. ON. margt, neuter of margr, much ; mart (adv.), much ; mergd, copia, multitudo.—Gudm.

Mortal.—Mortify. Lat. morior, mortuus, to die ; mors, mortis, death. Russ. merety, Sanscr. mri, to die ; Gr. brotos, mortal.

Mortar. I. A vessel to pound in. Lat. mortarium, Fr. mortier. It. mortaro, G. moerser. Pl.D. murt, what is crushed or ground ; murten, to crush, to mash ; Bav. dermuersen, dermuerschen, to pound, grind ; gemürsel, crushed stone. Muersell, minutal, est quidam cibus.—Gl. in Schmeller. Fin. murtaa, to break ; murto, things broken ; murska, crushed, broken to pieces ; murskata, to crush ; Esthon. murdma, to break. Lat. mordere, to break with the teeth, to bite.

2. Mortar, the cement made of lime and sand. Lat. mortarium, Fr. mortier, G. moertel, is probably to be explained from the materials being pounded up together. ' In Greece they have a cast by walrus or sea-horse. Russ.

themselves, to temper and beat in morters the mortar made of lime and sand, wherewith they mean to parget and cover their walls, with a great wooden pestill.—Holland's Pliny in R. Du. mortel, gravel, brick-dust; te mortel slaan, to beat to pieces; mortelen, to fall to pieces.

Mortgage. Fr. mort, dead, and gage, pledge. A pledge of lands to be the property of the creditor for ever if the money is not paid on a certain day. See Mortmain.

Mortise. Fr. mortaise, a notch cut in one piece of wood to receive the tenon, or projection by which another piece is made to hold it. Probably from Lat. mordere, to bite, as morsus is applied to the thing or place in which a buckle, javelin, knife, &c., sticks. Morsus roboris—Virg., the cleft of the tree in which the javelin of Æneas had lodged.

Mortmain. Fr. mort, dead, and main, hand. The transfer of property to a corporation, a hand which can never part with it again.

Mosaick. Mid.Lat. musæum, musivum, mosivum, musaicum, or mosaicum opus, inlaid work of figures formed by small coloured pieces of glass. The origin of the name unknown.

Mosque. Fr. mosquée. It. meschita, Sp. mesquita, Arab. mesdjid, signifying a place where one prostrates oneself, from sadjada, to prostrate.—Engelberg.

Moss. Fr. mousse. It. musco, muscio, Lat. muscus, G. moos, moss; Du. mos, mosch, Sp. moho, moss, mould; mohoso, mouldy, mossy; Pol. mech, Magy. moh, moss.

ON. mosi, G. moos, are also used, as E. moss, for moss-grown, swampy, or moory places. Donau-moos, Erdinger-moos, tracts of such land in Bavaria.

Most. See More.

Mote. A meeting. See Moot.

* Mote. AS. mot, atomus.—Matt. vii. 3. Cleveland moit, a small particle; moits and shivs, the particles of wood and other foreign substances from which the wool has to be cleansed after scouring. Sp. mota, a mote or small particle, a bit of thread or the like sticking to cloth, a slight defect.

Probably distinct from Du. mot, dust, sweepings, where the radical idea seems essentially different. Moit in Yorkshire (the equivalent of mote, mite) is used with doit (corresponding to dot or jot) in order to strengthen the expression. Neither moit nor doit, not an atom.—Whitby Gl.

The formation of these words may be understood from such expressions as those quoted under Motto.

The syllables mot, tot, gru, mik, kik, used in the first place to represent the slightest sound, are transferred to a slight movement, an atom or particle of bodily substance. Thus Gr. γρῦ is used in both senses. Οὐδὲ γρῦ, not a sound, not an atom. Sc. gru, a grain, a small particle.

And so mot, which in Fr. signifies a word or single element of speech, corresponds to E. mote, moit, mite, an atom. The Du. use mikken and kikken as the G. mücken, for the utterance of a slight sound. Niemand dorst mikken nog kikken (Halma), no one durst open his mouth. Hence may be explained It. mica and cica, a jot.

Precisely analogous is the train of thought in Gael. dùrdail, murmuring; dùrd, a hum, buzz (Macalpine), a syllable (Macleod); dùrdan, dùradan, a mote, an atom.

Moth. Two series of forms are commonly confounded. On the one hand we have Goth. matha, AS. matha, mathu, a worm, Du. made, OHG. mado, a maggot, ON. madkr, Sw. matk, mask, mark, makk (Rietz), Da. maddik, E. mawk, maggot, worm, Lap. mato, matok, caterpillar, worm. Fin. mato, matikka, worm, grub, serpent, creeping thing, which are plausibly explained from Fin. madan, mataa, to creep, crawl. On the other hand AS. moththe, OE. mought (that eats clothes—Palsgr.) Sc. mough, Du. mot, motte, Sw. matt, mott. The radical idea seems here to be the worm that reduces to dust; from Du. mot, dust, sweepings. So from Du. molm, dust of rotten wood, we have melm-worm, teredo, tinea, cossus, the insect by which the wood is consumed; from Bav. mel (in inflection, melb, melw), meal, powder, milben, milwen, to reduce to powder (gemilbet salz, powdered salt), we have milbe, Du. meluwe, milwe, a mite or moth; meluwen, to be worm-eaten. The same connection holds good between Du. mul, molsem, dust of rotten wood, molen, to decay (Kil.), and N. mol, ON. mölr, Pol. mol, a moth or mite. So also Illyr. grizza, sawdust (homgrizti, to bite or chew), grizlitza, moth, mite.

Florio uses moth in the sense of mote, atom.

Mother. Sanscr. mātār, Gr. μήτηρ, Lat. mater, Gael. mathair, Russ. mat, mater, ON. moðir.

The name of mother is given by analogy to certain preparations or solutions from which other substances are obtained. Sanders quotes a description of vinegar-making where directions are given for filling a new cask one-third with best vinegar, ' which is only to serve as mother (matter) for further formation of vinegar in the cask.' Mutter-fass, cask in which the materials in vinegar-making are set to ferment ; mutter lauge, Fr. eaux mère, lessive mère, E. mother-water, mother-lie, the spent waters from which the salts they contained have been crystallised. Mutter-erde, the mixture from whence saltpetre is extracted. Wine is called in Turkish dukhteri-rez, the daughter of the grape.

The name of mother is then given to the turbid sediment or lees which are formed in the course of fermentation, oil-pressing, or the like, and seem to be the matrix from whence the pure product is sprung. ' If the body be liquid and not apt to putrefy totally it will cast up a mother, as the mothers of distilled waters.'—Bacon. G. wein mutter, essig mutter, lees of wine or vinegar. Boh. matka, mother of a child, also dregs or lees ; Esthon. emma, mother ; emmakas, dregs. The word now becomes often confounded with forms signifying turbidity, thickness, derived from a totally different source. G. moder, mud, mire, also the lees of wine or oil ; moderig, muddy, mothery, thick and turbid. Pl.D. moder, lees ; mudder, mud. Du. moeder, moeder ; modder, moeder, dregs, lees ; modder, moder, mud.—Kil. See Mud.

Mottled.—Motley. Dappled, covered with spots of a different colour. Fr. mattes, curds ; mattelé, clotted, knotty or curdlike ; ciel mattonné, a curdled [mottled] sky, full of small curdled clouds.—Cot.

The notion of a spotted surface may naturally be expressed by the figure of spattering or splashing, dabbling in the wet. So we have dappled, sprinkled with dabs, from dabble, and in like manner mottled is related to Swab. motzen, Pl.D. matschen, E. muddle, to dabble, paddle. Hesse musseln, to dirty ; Boh. matlati, to daub, smear, blot. With a sibilant initial OE. smottered, splashed, dirtied ; Du. smodderen, to daub, dirty ; W. ysmot, a spot, patch ; ysmotio, to mottle.

Motto. It. motto, a word, but commonly used for a motto, a brief, a posy, or any short saying on a shield, in a ring, &c.—Fl. The slight indistinct sounds involuntarily made by opening the mouth are represented in different dialects by the syllables mut, muck, mum, μῦ, γρῦ, κῦκ, τοτ. Hence Lat. mutire, to utter a slight sound ; ne mutire quidem, Gr. μὴ μῦτε μηδὲ γρύζαν, not to open one's mouth, to be perfectly silent ; G. muckern, to make a slight sound ; nicht muck sagen, not to say a single word.—Küttn. The equivalent phrase in Sp. is no decir chus ni mus, in It. non dire motto ne totto. Hence motto, Fr. mot, a word, a single element of speech.

Mould. I. Fr. moule, Sp. molde, a mould. The latter also, as It. modolo, a model. From Lat. modulus, dim. of modus, form.

2. Moulder. Properly, friable earth, garden soil, then earth in general. Flemish mul, gemul, dust—Kil. ; Du. mullen, to crumble (moulder) away, fall to pieces—Bomhoff ; Pl.D. mull, loose earth, rubbish, and dust of other things ; Goth. mulda, dust ; ON. mold, earth ; molda, to commit to earth, to bury ; molna, to moulder away, to fall away by bits ; melia, mola, to crush, to break small ; moli, a crumb.

With an s prefixed, Dan. smul, dust ; smule, a small particle ; smule, smuldre, to crumble, moulder, smoulder.

3. Mouldy. From the connection between mouldiness and decay we are at first inclined to look for the derivation in the idea of mouldering away. Sw. mull, mould, earth ; multna, to moulder, crumble to dust, to rot, putrefy ; Bav. milben, milwen, to reduce to dust ; Du. meluwen, to rot.—Kil. But in truth the name seems to be taken, as in many similar cases, from the figure of a sour face expressing an ill condition of the mind, applied to the signs of incipient corruption given by the musty smell of decaying things. Thus we have G. mucken (properly to mutter), to look surly or gruff, pout out one's lips, scowl or frown, show ill-will or displeasure by a surly silence. And figuratively es muckt mit der sache or die sache muckt, the thing has a secret fault or defect, comes to nought.—Küttn. ; Bav. mauckeln, to smell close and musty. Du. moncken, monckelen, to mutter, to look gloomy or sour ; Bav. maunken, munken, munkschen, to look sour, sulk, (of the weather) to lour, (of flesh) to smell ill, to be musty ; Henneberg münkern, to be musty. Sw. mugga, to mumble ; Swiss muggeli, to mutter ; E. mug, an ugly (properly a sour) face ; Dan. muggen, sulky, also musty, mouldy. Bav. muffen, to mutter, grumble, to make a sour face, also to smell mouldy or musty ; Pl.D. muffen, to sulk, to smell or taste mouldy ; It. muffa, mouldiness, mustiness. Bav. müdern, to mutter, to sulk, or be out of humour, to lour, as gloomy weather— ther; Swiss mudern, to growl, to look troubled, to lour, mope; G. modern, to mould, to rot. The same train of thought is continued in Gr. μύλλω, to mutter, μυλ-λαίνειν, to distort the mouth, to mock, or make mouths; N. mulla, to mumble, speak low and unintelligibly; Swiss mauen, mauelen, to work the jaws; mäuel, mühel, a sour face; mauelen, G. maulen, Pl.D. muulen, to make a sour face, hang the mouth; Sw. mulen, sour-looking, gloomy, louring, overcast; mulna, to cloud over; Dan. mulne, to become mouldy; mul, mould, mouldiness. See Musty.

To Moult. For mout, the l being in-troduced by the influence of the u.
'When fathers of charyté beginnen to moute.' Hal.

Du. muiten, G. mausen, maussen, MHG. muzen, OHG. muzon, ODu. muten (Graff), muiten (Kil.), to change. There is no reason to suppose the word borrowed from Lat. muto, as the root is found also in the Finnish languages, which indeed afford an adequate explanation of its ul-timate origin. Finn. muu, other, an-other; muua, another place; muuttaa, to move to another place, to change to another form; Esthon. mu, other; mu-duma, muudma, to change or alter. Comp. G. ander, another, ändern, verän-dern, to change, transform.

Mound. A hedge or bank, a rampart or fence.—B. Mounding is used in Warwickshire for paling, or any kind of fencing. In ordinary E. the application has been restricted to the sense of a raised bank of earth. The origin is AS., ON. mund, hand, figuratively applied to signify protection. AS. mundian, to pro-tect; mundbora, G. vormund, protector, guardian; mündel, a ward. Perhaps Lat. munire, to fortify, protect; mœnia, walls, considered as a means of safety and protection, may be from the same root.

To Mount. From Fr. mont, a hill, and val, a valley, à mont and à val, up and down respectively; monter, to rise up; avaler, to let or send down, to vail or make lower.

Mountebank. A quack who mounted on a bench to vaunt his pretensions in the hearing of the crowd. So It. saltimbanco, a mountebank, from salire, saltare, to mount, and banco, bench.

To Mourn. Originally, to groan or murmur to oneself like a person in grief. 'Gemere, to sob, to whimper or mourn as a dove or turtle.'—Pr. Pm. Gael. mairg-nich, to groan, sob, bewail; Fr. morne, dull, louring, sad; mairgne, woe; Goth. maurnan, μεριμνᾶν, to be troubled about; OHG. mornen, to grieve; Boh. mrneti, to whimper; Walach. mormai, mornai, Magy. morogni, Russ. murnuikaty, to mutter, grumble.

Mouse. Gr. μῦς, Lat. mus, ON. mús, G. maus. It is singular that the name of so familiar an animal should not have been retained in the Romance languages.

Mouth. Goth. munths, ON. munnr, G. mund, Sc. munds, the mouth; N. of E. muns, the face.—B. As most of the words signifying mouth and jaws are taken from the action of the jaws in mut-tering, jabbering, chewing, it is probable that the origin of munths, mouth, is shown in forms like Swiss munzen, to chew; E. munch, to make a noise in chewing; Lat. mandere, manducare, to chew; Gael. mamntach, lisping, stammering; ON. mudla, to mumble; Swiss manschen, mangschen, Fr. manger, to eat; to manche, to eat greedily.—Palsgr. in Way; to munge, to eat greedily.—Bp. Kennet in Hal.

Move.—Motion. Lat. moveo, motum, to move.

Mow. AS. mucg, muga, a heap, stack, mow; ON. múgr, a mow of hay, a multi-tude of people; N. múga, mua, mue, a heap of hay; muga, to gather into heaps; mukka, a large heap; It. mucchia, Piedm. mugia, a heap.

To Mow. AS. mawan, Du. maeden, maeyen, G. mähen, Lat. metere, to mow. See Meadow.

Much.—Mickle. ON. miök, miög, N. mykjen, Dan. megen; ON. mikill (neuter, mikit), Goth. mikils, Swiss michel, Gr. μέγας, μεγάλη, Lat. magnus, Sanscr. maha, much, great. Sp. mucho is from multus, as puches, pap, puchada, a poultice, from pultis.

Muck. I. The cleansings of cattle stalls. N. mokdungje, mokkok, a muck-heap; mok-slede, a muck-sledge. From moka, to shovel, to cast aside with a shovel; moka i molda, shovelled into the earth, buried; moka ihop, to shovel together; moka fiós'e, to clean out the cow-house; ON. moka flór, to clean out the floor of the stable. Dan. muge, to clear away the dung in stables. In the same way G. mist, dung, seems to be from Boh. mesti, to sweep.

2. Moist, wet.—B. 'All in a muck of sweat.' N. mauk, mok, liquid used in cooking, whether water, milk, or whey; moykja, to make thinner, add liquid to food. Boh. mok, moisture, liquid; moknauti, to be wet; inoc, urine; mociti, to wet, soak, steep, to make water; Lat. macerare, to soak. See To Buck. 3. To run a muck—Malay amuk, a furious charge or assault.—Craufurd.

To Mucker. To hoard up. Commonly derived from AS. mucg. It. mucchio, a heap; mucchiare, ammucchiare, to heap up; ammuchio, a heaping or hoarding up. Grisons muschna, a heap; muschnar daners, to heap up money. Bav. moger, goods scraped together.

Mucketer.—Muckender. Sp. mocadero, a handkerchief; It. moccare, Fr. moucher, to wipe the nose, to snuff the candle, from It. mocco, Lat. mucus, the snuff of a candle, the secretion of the nose. See Mucous.

Mucous.—Mucilage. Lat. mucosus, from mucus, muccus, snivel, the secretion of the nose. The origin is the representation by the syllable muk, mug of the sound made by sniffling or drawing up the moisture into the nose. Gael. mug, a snuffle; smuc, a nasal sound, a snivel; smug, snivel, phlegm, spittle; smuig, a snout. Gr. μύκος, mucus; μύκηε, snuff of a wick; μύξα, snivel; μυκτήρ, a nostril.

Mud. Pl.D. mudde, mudder, Du. modder, G. moder, Bav. mott, matter, It. mota, Fin. muta, Esthon. mudda, mutta. The origin has been derived under Moor from forms signifying to dabble, to stir up liquids, to trouble and make thick. Russ. mutity, Boh. mautiti, mutiti, to stir, make thick; mut, muddy liquid, distillery wash; mutny, thick, turbid. Pol. mącić, to make thick or turbid, to embroil, confound; mąt, męt, mud, dregs; G. mantschen, to stir in wet or moist things, to soil one's hands with stirring in dirt, mud, &c.—K. Pl.D. matschen, to paddle in slush; matsch, patsch, quatsch, slush, mud.—Danneil. G. muddern, to stir up the mud as a ship when it touches ground. Swab. motzen, to dabble and wet oneself, to daub with colours.

Analogous to mud, from muddle, is Fr. bourbe, mud, from borboter, barboter, barbouiller, to dabble, muddle.

To Muddle.—Muzzy. The radical image, as shown under Mud, is the dabbling in the wet. To muddle, to root out with the bill, as geese and ducks do.—B. Thence to trouble, to make water turbid, and metaphorically to confuse the head like a person in drink. Muddled or muzzy with drink. Comp. Pol. mącić, to make thick or muddy, to embroil, confound; Pl.D. musseln, to daub, dirty,

MUFF work in a dirty manner; Dan. dial. mossel, confusion; maasle, to work in a slovenly manner, to deal with a thing in a disorderly way; at maasle kornet, to tread down corn like beasts trespassing; at maasle penge sammen, to scrape money together. By the same metaphor in a converse application we speak of muddling money away, wasting it in disorderly, unprofitable expense. Dabbling in the wet is often taken as the type of inefficient, unskilful action.

To Muffle.—Muff. To wrap up the mouth or face.—B. The more radical sense is to deaden sound, as when we speak of muffled oars or drum; then (transferring the signification, as is so constantly the case, from the region of the ear to that of the eye), to curtail the sight, to shroud from view. 'The leper shall have his head and his mouth muffeld.'—Bible 1531 in R. 'When the malefactor comes once to be muffled, and the fatal cloth drawn over his eyes.'—South. Then simply to cover up with clothes for the sake of warmth. From this latter sense are formed G. muffel, muff, Du. moffel, maff, a muff or furred receptacle for the hands; moffel (Kjl.), Fr. moufle, a winter mitten.

The sense of damping sound itself rests on the figure of muttering, uttering indistinct sounds, whence (by using the verb in a factitive sense), to cause to mutter, to give sound a muttering character, to make it indistinct. To muffle a drum, to damp its sound. The original sense is found in E. maffle, to utter indistinct sounds like an infant; to muff, to muffle, to speak indistinctly.—Hal. G. muffen, to express displeasure by muttering sounds; muffeln, to mumble or mutter, to speak unintelligibly. Both muffen and muffeln are then used in the sense of muffling up.—Sanders. The same connection between the senses of indistinct utterance and wrapping up in clothes has been pointed out by Sanders in the case of mummeln, to mumble, mutter (Kütn.), also (as well as mummen), to muffle up. 'Ich mummle euch ein von fuss zu kopf.' 'Die rothe wang' halb eingemummt in rauchwerk.' 'Die nordische wintervermummung, mantel und leib pelz.' Mummel in Swabia is a muffler of linen covering the face up to the eyes, which was worn by women in mourning. See Mummer.

Muff. 2. A fool (Nares), a stupid fellow.—Hall. Properly a stammerer, from muff, to speak indistinctly (Hall.), as maffling, a simpleton, from snaffle, to stammer. See Hoddipeak.
Mug. 1. Sw. mugg, an earthen cup. OG. migil, fiala; magele, magellel, ma-gella, makhollein, Swiss mayel, Milan miolo, a cup; Grisons majola, migiola, earthenware; It. maiolica, ornamental earthenware, supposed to be so named from having originally been made in Majorca; but a theory of this kind is so frequent a resource in etymology that it is always necessary to sift the historical evidence of the article having been actually produced at the place from whence it is supposed to be named. It seems to me more probable that majolica was derived from the OG. magele, a mug, than the converse.
2. An ugly face. It. mocca, a mocking or apish mouth; Esthon. mok, snout, mouth, lips; Gael. smuig, a snout, a face in ridicule. Like many depreciatory terms for mouth and face derived from the muttering sounds of a person out of temper. Swiss muggeln, to mutter; mug-gete, a mouthful; Sw. mugga, to mumble; Dan. muggen, sulky. See Mock, Muzzle.
Muggy. Close and damp; to muggle, to drizzle with rain; mug, a fog or mist.— Hal. ON. mugga, dark, thick weather; Bret. mouga, to stifle, to extinguish; mouguz, stifling; W. mwg, smoke; Gael. muig, smother, quench, become gloomy, misty, or dark, and as a noun, a frown, surliness, gloom, cloudiness, darkness. The radical idea is probably shown in Gael. mugach, snuffling, speaking through the nose, and thence, as speaking in such a tone is (in children especially) a sign of discontent and anger, sullen, gloomy, cloudy. Dan. mukke, to mutter, grumble; muggen, sulky; Exmoor muggard, sullen, displeased.— Hal. The application of terms signifying frowning or sullen of countenance to dark and cloudy weather is very common. Thus gloom is used to signify either a frown or the darkness of the air; to lour, properly to frown, expresses the threatening aspect of a cloudy sky. Du. moncken, to mutter, to frown, to lour; monckende opsicht, a louring look; monckende weder, covered or cloudy weather; monckende kolen, ashes burning covertly. In the last example is seen the passage to the sense of quenching or stifling.

Mulatto. Sp. mulato, the issue of black and white parents. From mule, the produce of a horse and ass.
Mulberry. G. maulbeer. Patois de Berri molle, Sw. mulbaer, Du. moerbesie. the berry; OHG. murbouma, maurpaum, the tree; from Lat. morus, Gr. μoρον, probably so called from the dark purple of the fruit. See Moor. It is remarkable however that closely resembling forms (Lap. muorje, Esthon., Wotiak mull) are found in many of the Finnic languages in the sense of berry, fruit.
Mulch. Straw half rotten; Pl.D. molsch, Bav. molschet, objectionably soft, soft through decay; molzet, soft, clammy, sloppy, as thawing snow or ill-dressed food; AS. molsnad, decayed; Manx molk, macerate, rot; Bav. mulfern, to wear down to molm or dust. Das alte Stro im Strosack ist alles dermulfert, ist ein lauteres gemulfer, is mere mulch. See Mellow.
Mulct. Lat. mulcta, a fine of money imposed.
Mule. Lat. mulus.
Mullar. Fr. mollette, a stone used by painters and apothecaries for grinding colours; moulleur, a grinder.—Cot. Pl.D. mullen, ON. mölva, to rub down, to reduce to powder.
Mulled Ale or Wine. Ale sweetened and spiced, derived by Way from mull, powder, dust, the spice being grated into it. But the true meaning seems to be a beverage such as was given at funerals; Sc. mulde-mete, a funeral banquet; OE. moldale, molde ale, potatio funerosa—Pr. Pm., from ON. molda, to commit to mould, or to bury. At ausa lik moldu, to sprinkle the corpse with mould; Fris. brenghen ter mouden, to bring to mould, i. e. to bury; Sc. under the mools, in the grave.
Mullein. Fr. mouleine, molaine, G. motten-kraut, motten-same, a plant of which the seeds were considered good against moths in clothes. Moth-mullen (verbascum blattaria) herbe aux mites.— Sherwood. Dan. mot. Boh. mol, a moth; G. Milbe, a mite.
Mullet. A five-pointed star in heraldry. Fr. mollette, molette, the rowel of a spur, also a name technically given to a little pulley or wheel used for certain purposes. Milan. moletta, a grindstone. From Lat. mola, a handmill.
Mullion.—Munnion. The short upright bars which divide the several lights in a window-frame.—B. It. mugnone, a carpenter's munnion or trunnion.—Fl. Sp. muñon, Fr. moignon, the stump of an arm or leg; moignon des ailes, the pinion of a wing. The munnion or mullion of a window is the stump of the division before it breaks off into the tracery of the window. It. moncone, a stump; monco, Bret. monk, mons, moufi, stumped, having lost hand or foot. For the ultimate derivation, see Mutilate.
Mullock. Rubbish. The mullok on an hepe ysweped was And on the flore yeast a canevas, And all this mullok in a sive ythrowe.—Chaucer. Pl.D. mullen, to rub to mull or dust; Bav. müllen, to rub to pieces; gemüll, rubbish. See Mulch. Peat-mull, the dust and fragments of peat; mulled-bread, oaten bread broken into crumbs.—Brocket. See Mould, 2.
Mult. — Multitude. Lat. multus, much.
Mum. I. G. mumme, a thick, strong beer brewed at Brunswick. ' Cerevisia quam mamam aut mocum ridiculè appellant pro potu homines hujus loci utuntur.'—Leibnitz Script. Brunsvic. in Adelung. Possibly the name may have arisen from the Sw. interjection, mum ! mum ! expressive of satisfaction with drink.—Rietz.
2. The sound made with the lips closed; the least articulate sound that a person can make. Thou myght bet mete the mist on Malverne hulles Than gete a glom of hure mouth til moneye be hem shewid.—P. P. Hence mum, like hist or whist, was used as enjoining silence; not a mum ! When men cry Mum, and keep such silence. Gascoigne in R.—And gave on me a glum, There was among them no word than but mum. Skelton. Mummyn as they that noght speke, mutio.—Pr. Pm. To Mumble. Pl.D. mummeln, to make the sound mum, mum, in eating or speaking, to chew like toothless people, to speak indistinctly.—Danneil. Du. mommelen, mompelen, ON. mumla, Mod.Gr. μαμουλίζω, to mutter; Bav. memmeln, memmezen, mummeln, mumpfen, to move the lips rapidly in chewing like a rabbit, to mutter, mumble. Mumpfel, the mouth; einen mumpfeln, to hit one on the mouth.
Mum-chance. Originally a game of dice by mummers or maskers, from Fr. chance, a chance or hazard, a game of chance; Swab. schanz, a venture, a cast at dice. Mommkantse, alea larvatorum.—Kil. Mummschanz schlagen, personatum aleatorios nummos ponere, iis positis lacessere collusorem, a masker to lay down stakes at dice and then challenge an opponent.—Vocab. A.D. 1618 in Schmeller. Fr. mommon, a troop of mummers, a visard or mask, also a set at dice by a mummer.—Cot. Mommon, a challenge to a throw at dice made by a masker, aleatorium et silens certamen.—Trevoux. The requisition of silence gave the word the appearance, in English, of being derived from mum, silent. And for mumchance howe'er the chance do fall You must be mum for fear of spoiling all. Machiavel's Dogg. in Nares. To play mumchance then became a proverbial expression for keeping silence.
Mummers. Maskers, performers of a rude kind of masque or scenic representation; mummery, ill-managed acting, masquerading, buffoonery; Fr. mommeur, It. mommeo, one that goes a-mumming; mommeare, to mum—Fl.; Du. momme, G. mumme, a masker, a mask. Du. momme, G. mummel, are also a ghost, a bugbear; Basque mamu, a hobgoblin, bugbear, and as a verb, to mask oneself in a hideous manner.—Salaberry. The same connection of ideas is seen in Lat. larva, a mask, a ghost or goblin. The foundation of this connection is laid in infancy, when the nurse terrifies the infant by covering her face and disguising her voice in inarticulate utterances, represented by the syllables Bo, Bau, Wau, Mum. It. far bau bau, to terrify children, covering the face.—La Crusca. Sometimes the nurse turns this means of producing terror to sport, covering her face with a handkerchief when she cries Bo ! or Mum ! and then removing the terror of the infant by displaying her face, when she cries Peep ! or some equivalent word. Such is the game of Bo-peep, Peep-po, Sc. Keek-bo, Pl.D. Kiekebu, Mumm-kiek, Mumm-mumm spielen, Blinde-mumm spielen. The object of terror presented to the mind of the infant by the masked nurse is the primitive type of a bugbear, and is named from the terrifying cry, It. bau, bau-bau, w. bw, G. wau-wau, mummel, mumme. Gr. μορμώ ! a cry to frighten children with; Μορμώ ! δάκνει ἵππος, Bo ! the horse bites; μορμός, μορμωτός, frightful. Μομμώ, ὁ μὴ ῥυθμῷ φάμεν, τὸ φοβερὸν τοῖς παιδίοις.—Hesych. It. baucco, a bugbear, a woman's mask or muffler; bauccare, to play bo-peep, to scare children, to mask or muffle.—Fl. Hence the application of the name of mumming to a masked entertainment. In illustration of the universality of the principles on which language is formed, Adelung mentions that among the Mandingoes in Africa the wives are kept in order by a device similar to that by which children are terrified in Europe. A fearfully disguised man with a loud noise threatens to devour the disobedient wife, and from the sounds which he utters is called Mumbo-jumbo, substantially identical with the G. mummel.
Mummy. Arab, moumiya, from moum, wax.—Engelberg.
To Mump. To bite the lip like a rab-bit, to beg ; mumper, a genteel beggar.—B. Sc. mump, to speak indistinctly, and figuratively to hint at. The word fundamentally represents an audible action of the jaws, and hence either chewing, muttering, or making faces. ON. mumpa, to eat voraciously ; Swiss mumpfeln, to eat with full mouth ; Bav. mumpfen, mumpfeln, to mumble, chew ; die mumpfel, the mouth. From making faces we pass to the notion of tricks, gestures, assumed for the purpose of exciting pity or the like. Mumps or mowes, monnoie de singe—Sherwood. ' Morgue, a saddened look, the mumping aspect of one who would seem graver than he is.'—Cot. Du. mompen, to cheat, to trick.—Bomhoff.
Mumps. Pl.D. mumms, swelling of the glands of the neck. Probably from the uneasy action of the jaws which it produces.
Munch. Fr. manger, It. mangiare, from Lat. manducare, to chew.
Mundane. Lat. mundus, the world.
Municipal. The Roman municipia were towns whose citizens received the rights of Roman citizenship but retained their own laws. The proper meaning of municeps is one who takes the offices of a state, from munus, an office or public function, and capio, to take. It was used in the sense of citizen or fellow-citizen.
Munificent. Lat. munifex (from mu-nus, an office or public charge, also a gift), one who performed a public duty ; munificentia, liberality in the expenditure expected from a public officer, liberality in general.
Muniment.—Munition.—Ammunition. Lat. munio, Fr. munir, to fortify, strengthen, furnish or store with all manner of necessaries ; muniment, a strengthening or fortifying ; muniments, justifications of allegations in law.—Cot. Muniments is now only heard in the sense of records or evidences of title to property and such family papers as are preserved with them.
Mur. A cold in the head. Fr. moure, snout, muzzle ; mourues, the mumps ; morfondre [moure-fondre], to take cold, from the running at the nose ; fondre, to melt away.
Mural. Lat. murus, a wall.
To Murder. Goth. mauthrjan, G. morden, to slay ; Fr. meurtre, a homicide; ON. mord, a privy slaying, concealment ; i mordi, secretly ; mord-jarn, a dagger. Bohem. mord, slaughter, mordowati, to slay, may be borrowed. It is difficult to speak positively as to the radical signification, whether the word be connected with forms like Lat. mort-, death, Bohem. mrtwy, dead, mrtwiti, to kill, mriti, Lat. mori, to die, and thus signify simply putting to death ; or whether it may not signify knocking on the head, and thus be connected with Swiss morden, Pl.D. murten, to crush, Fin. murtaa, to break, Esthon. murdma, to break, to crush. In the latter language murdma kal, to break the neck, is used in the sense of killing. The Fr. meurtre, a murder, agrees in a similar way with meurtrir, to bruise.
To Murle. To crumble. W. mwrl, a crumbling stone ; Fin. murtaa, murrella, to break ; muru, a fragment, bit ; muria, loose, friable ; Sw. mör, tender, soft, friable ; Fin. murska, broken to bits ; G. morsch, friable, brittle, mellow, soft.
Murmur. A representation of a sound like that of running waters, the wind among branches, &c. Lat. murmurare, Gr. μορμύρειν. A similar element is seen in Fr. marmotter, to mutter, or with an initial b instead of m. Mod. Gr. βορβορύζειν, to rumble.
Murrain. OFr. morine, carcass of a dead beast, mortality among cattle; It. moria, a pestilence among cattle. From mourrir, morire, to die. See Morkin.
Murrey. Fr. morée, Sp. morado, violet, mulberry-coloured ; Lat. morum, a mul-berry.
Muscle. Lat. musculus, a little mouse, a muscle of the body, the shell-fish. In the same way Gr. μῦς, a mouse, is used in both the other senses. Mod.Gr. ποντικι, a mouse or rat ; ποντικακι, a small rat, a muscle of the body. Cornish logo-den fer (literally, mouse of leg), calf of the leg ; Serv. misk, a mouse ; mishitza, female mouse, also, as well as mishka, the arm. Fr. souris, both for a mouse and the brawne of a mannes' arme.—Palsgr.
Muse. Lat. musa. See Music.
To Muse. Fr. muser, to muse, dream, study, to regard fixedly like a fool.

muse quelque part, he stays somewhere; musard, dreaming, gazing or pausing on, lingering; It. musorone, lumpish, heavy, pouting, musing.—Fl.

The absorption of one brooding over angry thoughts is commonly expressed by the figure of the muttering sounds in which he unconsciously gives vent to his feelings. Thus Bret, bouda, to murmur or buzz, gives rise to Fr. bouder, to sulk.

The muttering sounds are however more frequently represented by syllables with an initial m, mop, muff, muk, mut, muss, giving rise to a great variety of forms signifying sulking, keeping an angry silence, and ultimately (with the usual softening down of the original figure), the simple fact of being immersed in thought. Du. moppen, to sulk; Bav. muffen, to mutter, grumble, hang the mouth; Swiss muffen, to sulk, be surly; G. mucken, mucksen, to mutter, look surly or gruff, scowl, show one's ill-will by a surly silence—Küttn.; Du. moncken, to mutter, to scowl; E. mutting, muttering, sulking, glumping—Hal.; Swiss mudern, to snarl, grumble, scowl, mope, sulk; N. mussa, to whisper, mutter, sulk; Lat. mussare, to buzz, murmur, mutter, to brood over, to consider in silence. 'Flent moestis, mussantque patres.' 'Mussat rex ipse Latinus quos generos vocet:'—the king muses on the choice of a son-in-law. — Virg. Musat, dubitat in loquendo, timet, murmurat. — Papias in Duc. Gr. μύζω, to murmur, moan, mutter, to express displeasure; Bret. mouza, to sulk, be out of temper, express displeasure; Swiss musen, to mope, to be sunk in melancholy; Rouchi mouser, to sulk; Du. muizen, to ponder, muse. The appearance of a derivation from muis, a mouse, leads Kilian to explain the word as a metaphor from the silent absorption with which a cat watches for a mouse; 'muysen, mures venari, tacite quærere.' In popular thought the reference to a mouse presented itself under a different aspect. A dreaming, self-absorbed condition of mind is very generally attributed to the biting of a maggot or worm, the stirring of crickets, bees, flies, and even mice, in the head. In the year 1183 the principality of Ravenna was conferred on Conrad, 'quem Itali Musca in cerebro nominabant, eo quod plerumque quasi demens, videretur.' — Duc. In the prologue to the eighth book of Douglas' Virgil, the author, in his sleep, speculating on all the wrong things that are going on in the world, is addressed by a man whom he sees in his sleep, 'What berne MUSKET be thou in bed with thy hede full of beis.' So Pol. roj, a swarm; rojanie, musing, reverie, dreaming; It. grillo, a cricket, by metaphor, a fantastic conceit or whim, as we say, crickets or bees-nests in one's head.—Fl. Gabbia di grilli, sorgii, a cage for crickets or for mice, a self-conceited gull.—Ibid. Fr. avoir des rats, to be maggoty, to be a humorist.—Boyer. The analogy of such expressions led to the erroneous supposition that muizen, to muse, was to be explained in the same manner, and muizenis, musing, was converted into muizenest, mouse-nest. Pl.D. muisenester in koppe hebben, to have mouse-nests in the head, to be absorbed in thought. Of a person so occupied they say 'He sut uut as een pot vull muise,' he looks like a pot full of mice.

Mushroom. Mussheron, a toadstool, champignon. —Palsgr. Fr. mousseron, a name given at the present day to a dark yellowish brown mushroom, eatable though coarse, and growing in forests, in England common among heath. From the mossy nature of the ground on which it grows, as champignon, the common English mushroom, from champs, the fields in which it is found. Fr. mousse, moss.— N. & Q. Feb. 5, 1859.

Music. Lat. musica, Gr. μουσική. Μοισᾶν φέρειν, to sing—Pindar; τίς ἤδη μοῦσα? what strain is this?—Eurip. As song was undoubtedly the origin of poetry, it may be conjectured that the word is ultimately derived from a root signifying the modulation of the voice in singing, a sense preserved in Wal. muzer, to hum a tune, fredonner, chantonner, to make music; Prov. musar, to play on the bag-pipes; Lat. mussare, to buzz, hum, mutter.

Musket. Mid. Lat. muschetta, a bolt shot from a springald or balista. 'Potest præterea fieri quod hæc eadem balistæ tela possent trahere quæ muschettæ vulgariter appellantur.'—Sanutus in Duc. Ne nuls tels dars ni puet meffaire, Combien que on i sache tire, Malvoisine des sajettes, Ne espringalle ses mouchettes. Guigneville, ibid. The implements of shooting were commonly named after different kinds of hawks, as It. terzeruolo, a pistol, from terzuolo, a merlin; falconetto, a falconet, sagro, a saker, names formerly given to pieces of ordnance, while falcone and sagro were also the names of hawks. In the same way the old muschetta was from Prov. mosquet, Fr. mouchet, AS. mushafoc, a sparrow-hawk, a name probably taken, not, as Diez supposes, from its speckled breast (moucheté, specked), but from Du. mossche, mussche, a sparrow, a word preserved in E. titmouse.
Muslin. Fr. mousseline, Venet. muso-lin. Mod. Gr. μουσοῦλι. Said to be from Moussul in Mesopotamia. ' In Mesopo-tamia texuntur telae quae apud Syros et Ægyptos et apud mercatores Venetos ap-pellantur Mussoli ex hoc regionis nomine.'—Nomenclature Arabe at the end of Works of Avicenna in Dict. Etym. This derivation is confirmed by Arabic mous-oliyy, muslin, properly, belonging to Mousûl, as the name of the town is written in Arabic.
Mussulman. Turk. musslim, a fol-lower of Islam, a true believer ; pl. muss-limin, musslimân, moslems.
Must. G. müssen, Du. moeten, to be forced ; Sw. måste, must ; Du. moete, leisure ; moet, necessity, pressure. Moete, opera, labor.—Kil. Pol. musić, zmuszać, to force, to constrain ; musieć, to be obliged, to be necessary ; musisz się bić, you must fight ; Bohem. musyti, to be bound, forced to do ; musyl, one com-pelled ; mussenj, compulsion, necessity.
Must. Lat. mustum, Fr. moust, mout, the juice of grapes ; Russ. msto, mest, G. most, juice of fruits ; Sw. must, juice, sap, moisture, pith, substance ; must i jorden, moisture in the earth ; rotmust, radical moisture. Illyrian mastiti, to crush grapes, to make must, to colour, daub with grease ; mast, must, colour for the face, salve, grease.
Mustaches. Mod.Gr. μύσταξ, mus-taches, μυστάκι, whiskers ; Gr. μύσταξ, upper lip, moustache ; μάσταξ, the mouth, jaws, upper lip ; Venet. mustazzo, snout, face (in a depreciatory sense) ; mustazzada, a blow on the mouth ; mustachiare, to wry the mouth ; It. mostazzo, mustachio, snout, muzzle, face. Derived from a form like Lat. masticare, to chew, Pl.D. mus-seln, mustern, to mutter, on the principle illustrated under Muzzle.
Mustard. Venet. mostarda, a sauce composed of boiled must with mustard-seed boiled in vinegar ; Sp. mostaza, thickened must ; mostazo, mustard ; mos-tillo, sauce composed of mustard and sweet wine.
Muster. An inspection of troops. Fr. monstrer, to show ; monstre, monstrée, a view, show, sight, muster of.—Cot.
Musty. From Pl.D. mulen, to make a sour face, may be explained Sw. mulen, gloomy ; se mulen ut, to look sad or gloomy, and thence (on the principle explained under Mould) Dan. mulne, to be-come mouldy. From the same verb is formed Pl.D. muulsk, muulsch (—Schütze), sour-looking ; muulsk uut seen, to look sour, to sulk.—Brem. Wtb. Hence per-haps Pl.D. mulstrig, in Lippe mustrig (Deutsch. Mundart, VI.), and the synony-mous E. musty. The l of muulsk is lost in the same way in Sw. musk ; se under musk, to look sour, leading to Prov. Dan. musk, mustiness ; musken, musty. Hessian, mutzen, to pout, to hang the mouth, to look surly or gruff, and met. to begin to decay ; mutzig, surly, illtempered-look-ing ; of the weather, threatening ; smell-ing of decay, musty ; mutzig riechen, to smell musty. Fris. mul, mutsch, mucksch, sour-looking, sulky, still.—Outzen.
Mutable. -mute. Lat. muto, to change. See Mew.
Mute. The syllables mut, muk, mum, kuk, are taken to represent the slight sounds made by a person who is absorbed in his own ill-temper, or kept silent by his fear of another. Hence Lat. mutire, muttire, to murmur, mutter. Nihil mu-tire audeo, I do not dare to utter a sylla-ble. G. nicht einen muck von sich geben, not to give the least sound. Du. kikken, mikken, to utter a slight sound. Magy. kuk, kukk, a mutter ; kukkanni, to mutter. Then by the same train of thought as in the case of E. mum, Lat. mutus, silent, dumb ; Serv. muk, silent ; muchati, to be silent ; Magy. kuka, dumb.
Mute. Dung of birds.—B. Fr. mutir ; to mute as a hawk ; esmeut, the drop-pings of a bird.—Cot. It. smaltire, to digest one's meat ; smaltare, to mute as a hawk. From the liquid nature of the ex-crements of birds. ON. smelta, to liquefy.
To Mutilate. Lat. mutilo, to cut short, reduce to a stump ; mutilus (of animals that should have horns), hornless. Manx mut, any short thing ; muttagh, short, thick and blunt ; smuttan, a stump ; smuttagh, stumpy, short-snouted. Gael. smut, a stump, beak, snout ; G. mutz, anything stumped or cut short ; mutzohr, a cropear ; mutzschwanz, a bobtail ; Swiss mutschig, gemutschet, mutt, g'mut-tig, cropped, short and thick ; mutsch, mutti, muttli, a beast without horns; It. mozzo, stumped, cut short ; mozzo, moz-zicone, a stump ; mozzare, to cut off. Gris. muotsch, muott, mott, cropped, cut short.
The most familiar type of the act of cutting off the extremity of a thing is blowing the nose in the way it is done by those who have not a handkerchief, or the snuffing of a lamp or candle, to which the word signifying in the first instance the wiping of the nose is commonly transferred. And this I believe is the origin of the foregoing forms. Thus It. mocco, moccio, mozzo (mozzi—Fl.), is the snuff or snivel of the nose; mocco, moccola, also the snuff of a candle, tip of the nose, also like G. mutz, applied to the penis (Fl.); moccare, mocciare, to blow the nose, to snuff a candle; mozzare, to cut off. Brescian mocar, to snuff a candle, to blow one's nose, to take off the point of a thing, to cut off, a member or a part of anything.—Peschieri.

The forms moccare, mocciare, become in Piedm. mochè, to snuff the candle or lamp, to pinch off the shoots of the vines, to crop trees or plants, and moc (as It. mozzare), to take off the point of anything to make it blunt; mocà la coa, le orie d'un can, to crop the tail or ears of a dog. Moc, mot, blunt, stumped. The nasalisation of the root, as in Lat. emunctus, gives It. monco, monchino, moncherino (synonymous with mocherin—Fl.), stump of the arm.

Mutiny. Fr. mutin, turbulent, unquiet, seditious; Du. muyten, to mutter, murmur, excite sedition by privy whisperings; muytery, sedition, revolt; Bav. mutern, to grumble. Mutilon, mussitare.—Gl. in Schm. Lat. mutio, muttio, to utter suppressed sounds, to mutter. Fin. mutista, to whisper, mutter; mutina, muttering.

To Mutter. Lat. muttire, to utter low sounds.

Mutton. It. montone, Venet. moltone, Prov. Cat. moltó. Mid.Lat. multo, Fr. mouton, a wether or castrated sheep, then sheep in general. OFr. molt, W. mollt, mollwyn, Bret. maout, wether.

Mutual. Lat. mutuus, interchangeable, reciprocal, from each to the other. Probably from muto, to change, as ἀμοιβ-αῖος, reciprocal, from ἀμείβω, to change.

Muzzle. It. muso, Fr. museau (for musel), the snout or muzzle of a beast; It. musolare, to muzzle or bind up the muzzle; Fr. muselière, a muzzle or provender bag; muserolle, a musroll or noseband.

A depreciatory term for the jaws and mouth, and so for the mouth of a beast, is often taken from a representation of the sounds made by the jaws in mumbling, muttering, or chewing. So from Swiss mauen, mauelen, to chew, mullen, to chew, to eat, we have mauel, muhel, Fr. moue, a sour face, G. maul, chops, mouth, ON. muli, a snout; from G. murren, to mutter, grumble, Lang. moure, a sour face, mine refrognée, also as Fr. moure, mourre, the snout or muzzle—Cot.; from Bav. mocken, mucken, to mutter discontentedly, Du. mocken, buccam ducere sive movere, to pout, grumble, fret (Bomhoff), It. mocca, an ugly mouth, Esthon. mok, the snout, mouth, lips; from Du. moffelen, maffelen, to maffle, lisp as an infant, move the jaws, Rouchi mouffeter, to move the lips, Bav. muffen, to mutter, grumble, hang the mouth, muffelen, to mumble, chew with difficulty, Fr. muffle, mouffle, the snout or muzzle; from Bav. mumpfen, mumpfeln, to mump or mumble, to chew, mumpfel, the mouth. In the same way It. muso seems to be derived from forms like Gr. μύζω, Lat. musso, or E. muse, of which we have shown that the original sense is to mutter.

Muzzy. See To Muddle.

Myriad. Gr. μυριάς, 10,000; μύριος, countless, numberless; μύριος, 10,000. The radical signification is probably a swarm of ants, as we use to swarm, or Fr. fourmiller, in the sense of to be in countless numbers, AS. myra, Pl.D. myre, E. pismire, an ant; ON. maurr, an ant; myr, a countless multitude. Gr. μυρμηξ, Fin. muuriainen, an ant.

Mystery.—Mystic. Gr. μυστήριον, μυστικός, from μύω, to hold secret, mu and mut being used to represent the least sound, the sound made with nearly closed lips. See Mum.

Myth.—Mythic. Gr. μῦθος, a saying, a fable.

To Nab. To catch or seize, properly to clap the hand down upon a thing; in Scotland, to strike. Dan. nappe, to snatch, snatch at, pluck; nap-tang, nippers; Fin. nappata, suddenly to seize, to snap, to pluck; Du. knappen, to crack, to seize; Fr. naque-mouche, a fly-catcher.
The sound of a crack is represented by the syllables knap or knack, which are thence used as roots in the signification of any kind of action that is accompanied by a cracking sound. G. knappen, to crackle as fire; nüsse knappen or knack-en, to crack nuts; knappern, to chew hard dry food into pieces with a certain noise; Fin. napsaa, to crackle as the teeth in chewing; Fr. naqueter des dens, to chatter with the teeth; Du. knabbelen, to gnaw, nibble.
The sense is then extended to any quick, short movement, although not accompanied by audible noise. G. knappen, to nod, jog, totter, move to and fro—Küttn.; ein brett knappt auf, springs up—Schmeller; Fin. napsahtaa, to vibrate as a pendulum, to wink; Fr. naqueter de la queue, to wag the tail.
From the notion of a short, abrupt movement we pass to that of a projection or excrescence, a part of a surface which starts out beyond the rest, and thence to the idea of a lump or rounded mass; Gael. cnap, strike, beat, a stud, knob, lump, a little hill; N. nabb, a peg or projection to hang things on; E. dial, to nub, to push; knop, a bud; knoppet, a small lump; knob, a rounded projection; N. nobb, knabb, NE. nab, the rounded summit of a hill, as Nab-scar, above Grasmere; nob, the head; nobble, a lump; knoblocks, nubblings, small round coals; Du. knobbel, a knot, lump, hump.
Nabob. Ptg. nababo, governor of a province in the E. Indies, from Arab. nouwâb, pl. of nâib, lieutenant, viceroy, prince.
Nadir. Arab. nâdhir as-semt, the point opposed to the zenith.—Engelberg.
Nag. Nagge or lytille best, bestula, equillus.—Pr. Pm. Du., Fris. negghe, equus pumilus.—Kil. Swiss noggeli, a dumpy woman.—Id. Bernensein Deutsch. Mundart. The radical meaning is simply a lump, a figure often taken to designate anything small of its kind. ON. nabbi, OFr. nabe, nabot, a dwarf, from nab, knob, a lump; E. dial. knor, knurl, a dwarf, from knur, a knot.—Hal.
In the last article has been traced the line of thought from the root knack, knapp (passing into nag, nab), signifying an abrupt movement, to the notion of a projection, prominence, lump. In the original sense may be mentioned E. dial. nag, to jog, whence nogs, the projecting handles of a scythe; Dan. knag, a wooden peg, cog of wheel, handle of a scythe; Gael. cnag, to crack, snap the fingers, rap, knock; a knock, knob, peg; E. dial. nug, a protuberance or knob, a block; nug-head, a blockhead, and nugget, a small lump, a name with which the gold workings of late years has made us so familiar.
Nagging.—Naggy. A nagging pain is a slight but constant pain, as the tooth-ache, an irritating pain. Naggy, touchy, irritable.—Hal. N. nagga, to gnaw, to irritate, plague, disturb; Sw. nagga, to gnaw, to prick.
Nail. G. nagel, both a nail of the hand and a nail to fasten with; ON. nagl, nögl, unguis, nagli, clavus; Goth. ganagljan, to fasten with nails; Lith. nâgas, nail of the finger, hoof, claw; nâginti, to scratch; Serv. nokat, Bohem. nehet, Gr. ὄνυξ, Sanscr. nakha, unguis; Fin. nakla, naula, clavus. Fin. naula is specially applied to the nails by which the different weights are marked on a steelyard, and hence (as Esthon. naggel) signifies a pound weight, explaining the E. nail, a measure of cloth, viz. the length marked off by the first nail on the yard measure.
It is to be supposed that the artificial nail is named from the natural implement of scratching, as Lat. clavus, a nail, from an equivalent of E. claw; and as scratching and biting are like in effect, the word is derived by Grimm from nagen, to gnaw or bite. ON. nagga, N. nagga, nugga, nygja, to rub, to scrape; Sw. nagga, to prick.
For the identity of ὄνυξ and Lat. unguis, see Nave.
Naked. Goth. naquaths, OHG. nakot, G. nackt, ON. nacquidr, nakinn, naktr, Lith. nogas, Pol. nagi, Gael. nochd, W. noeth, Lat. nudus, Sanscr. nagna.

As the essence of nakedness is having the skin displayed, Adelung suggests Fin. nahca, Lap. nakke, the skin, as the origin of the word.

Name. If we confine our attention to the Latin forms, Fr. nom, It. nome, Lat. nomen, name, agnomen, cognomen, ignotus, we have no hesitation in explaining the word from (gnoo) gnosco, to know, as that by which a thing is known. But Gr. ὄνομα, ὄνυμα, ill accords with such a theory, and the form nam, with more or less modification, is common to the whole series of Indo-European and Finnic languages to the extremity of Siberia. Goth. namo, ON. nafn, namn. Fin. nimi. Lap. namm (nimmet, to mark, observe), Wotiak nim, nam, Ostiak nem, nimta, nimta, Magy. nev, Mordvinian läm, Tscheremiss lem, Samoiede nim, nimde, Gael. ainm, W. enw, Bret. hano, Pruss. emnes. Boh. jmeno, Pol. imie, Sanscr. naman, Pers. nām, Turk. nāni, name. Turk. nām is used also in the sense of reputation, to be compared with Lat. ignominia.

Nap. 1. A short sleep, properly a nod. G. knappen, to move to and fro, nod, jog, totter—Küttn; Tirol. gnappen, to nod, especially in slumber—D. M. v. 437. See Nab. So Fin. nuokkata, to nod; nukkua, to fall asleep.

2. AS. hnoppa, Du. noppe, flock or nap of cloth; noppig, shaggy; N. napp, shag, pile, the raised pile on a counterpane; nappa, shaggy; Pl.D. nobben, flocks or knots of wool upon cloth; Du. noppen, Sw. noppa, Fr. noper, to nip off the knots on the surface of cloth. The women by whom this was done were formerly called nopsters. It seems that the origin of the word is the act of plucking at the surface of the cloth, whether in raising the nap or in nipping off the irregular flocks. Pl.D. nobben, gnobhen (of horses), to nibble each other, as if picking the knots from each other's coat. N. nappa, nippa, to pluck, as hair or feathers, to pluck a fowl, to twitch; nappa, to raise the nap upon cloth; Sw. noppra sik, to prune oneself as birds; Fin. nappata, nappia, to pluck, as berries; Esthon. nappima, G. kncipen, to nip, to twitch; Lap. nappet, to cut off the extremities, to crop; Gr. κνάπτω, γνάπτω, to card or comb wool, to dress cloth; γνάφαλλου, flock, wool scratched off in dressing; κναφεύς, a fuller, carder; κνάφος, a teasel or wool card.

Nape. Properly the projecting part at the back of the head, then applied to the back of the neck. AS. cnæp the top of anything, brow of a hill; W. cnæp, a knob, boss. See Nab. The W. gwegil is translated by Richards the noddle or hinder part of the head, and by Spurrell the nape of the neck. In the same way Fr. nuque, the nape of the neck, is identical with Gael. cnoc, cnuc, ON. hnuk, a knoll, hillock, W. cnwc, a knob, bunch, lump; cnwc y gwegil, the back part of the scull. Compare also ON. hnacki, N. nakkje, the back of the head; G. nacken, the nape of the neck, the back.

Napery.—Napkin. It. nappa, a table-cloth, napkin; the tuft or tassel that is carried at a lance's end; nappe, the jesses of a hawk, labels of a mitre, ribands or tassels of a garland. A parallel form with Lat. mappa, a clout, as Fr. natte with E. mat, and like mappa originally signifying a tuft. E. knap or knop, a bud, button, knob.

Narrate. Lat. narro, narratum, to tell of, relate.

Narrow. AS. nearwe, narrow. See Near.

Narwhal. The sea unicorn, ON. náhvalr, so called on account of the pallid colour of the skin; ná, nár, a corpse.

Nasal. Lat. nasus, the nose.

Nascent.— Natal.— Native.— Nature. Lat. nascor, natus, to be born, to have sprung from; natalis, belonging to one's birth; nativus, natura.

Nasty. Formerly written nasky. 'Maulavé, ill-washed, nasky.'—Cot. Pl. D. nask, and with the negative particle, which is sometimes added to increase the force of disagreeable things, unnask, dirty, piggish, especially applied to eating or filthy talk.—Brem. Wtb. In the same way, with and without the negative particle, Sw. snaskig, osnaskig, immundus, spurcus; naskug, nasket, dirty, nasty (Rietz.), Lap. naske, sordidus—Ihre; Syrianian njasti, dirt; njasties, dirty. The pig is so generally taken as a type of dirtiness that the word may well be taken from Fin. naski, a pig, as Lat. spurcus apparently from porcus. Or possibly it may be taken from a representation of the smacking noise which accompanies a piggish way of eating, and from which the Fin. naski, a pig, seems to be taken. Fin. naskia, to make a noise with the lips in chewing, like a pig eating; Dan. snaske, to champ one's food with a smacking noise; Sw. snaska, to eat with a smacking noise like a pig, to be slovenly, dirty —Rietz.; Swiss nätschen, to make a smacking noise in eating; Carinthian natsche, a pig.

Nation. Lat. *natio*, from *nascor*, *natus*, to be born.
Naught.—Naughty. AS. *na-wiht*, *naht*, *neaht*, *no-whit*, *naught*, nothing. Naughty, good for nothing.
Nausea. Lat. *nausea*, Gr. *vavola*, the being sea-sick, from *vavs*, a ship.
Nautical. — Naval. — Navigation. Lat. *navis*, Gr. *vavs*, a ship, vessel to sail; *navita*, *nauta*, *vavtns*, a sailor; *navigo*, to sail.
Nave. I.—Navel. G. *nabe*, *nabel*, Pl.D. *nave*, *navel*, nave of a wheel.—Adelung. G. *nabel*, Du. *navel*, ON. *nabli*, *nafli*, Sanscr. *nabhi*, the navel; Fin. *napa*. Lap. *nape*, navel, centre, axis; Esthon. *nabba*, navel.
The radical meaning of the word seems to be knob, the nave of a wheel being originally merely the end of the axle projecting through the solid circle which formed the wheel. ON. *nabbi*, a knoll, hillock; W. *cnap*, a knob, boss, button.
The navel is the remnant of the cord by which the *foetus* is attached to the mother's womb, and appears at the first period of life as a button or small projection. It is thus appropriately expressed by a diminutive of *nave*, *navel*. In like manner Gr. *oµφαλος*, Lat. *umbilicus*, a navel, are diminutives of *umbo*, a knob or boss. So Boh. *pup*, an excrescence; *pupek*, navel. The radical identity of *oµφαλος* and *navel* has been very generally recognised, although the passage from one to the other has not been very clearly made out. It seems to be one of those numerous cases where an initial *n* has been either lost or added, as in E. *umpire* from *nompair*, *apron* from *napron*, *auger* from *nauger*. The loss of the initial *n* in *nob*, and the nasalisation of the final *b* (as in Fr. *nabot*, *nambot*, a dwarf), produce the radical syllable in *umbo* and *oµφαλος*.
It is remarkable that the *n* of *nave* is lost in other cases, as in Du. *aaf*, *ave*, for *naaf*, *nave*, the nave of a wheel, and in *auger*, Du. *evigher* for *nevigher*. Fin. *napa-kairi*, literally centre-bit. Moreover, the *n* which is lost in *umbo* and *oµφαλος* is again replaced in Fr. *nombril*.
The relation of Lat. *unguis*, *ungula*, to *ovvξ*, nail, may be explained on the same principle, regarding *vvξ* as the radical syllable; and here too the same loss of the initial *n* is found in the probable root, Sw. *agga* and *nagga*, to prick.
2. Mid.Lat. *navis*, Fr. *nef*, the part of the church in which the laity were placed. ' *Navem quoque basilicas auxit*.'—Orderic. Vital. Supposed to be from the vaulted roof, the curved roofs of African huts being compared by Sallust to the hull of a ship.
' *Oblonga incurvis lateribus tecta quasi navium carinas sunt*.' Ducange gives several instances in which *navis* is used for the vaulted roof over part of a church.
' *Simulque et in nave quæ est super altare sarta tecta omnia noviter restauravit*.'
It is remarkable that Sp. *cubo* is the nave of a wheel; It. *cuba*, the nave or middle aisle of a church.
Nay. For *ne aye*, Goth. *niaiv*, never.
A peerless firelock peece — That to my wits was nay the *like* in Turkey nor in Greece.—Gascoigne.
Neap. Scanty, deficient.—B. Neap-tide, the low tides, as opposed to the spring or high tides at new and full moon. ON. *neppr*, narrow, contracted; *feorneppr*, short-lived; Dan. *neppe*, scarcely, hardly; *knap*, scanty; *knappe af*, to stint, curtail.
Near.—Nigh. Goth. *nehv* (compar. *nehvis*), AS. *neah*, *nigh*, near; *near*, nearer; *nehst*, *nyhst*, next. ' *Ga hider near*, come nearer.'—Gen. 27. 21. ON. *ná*, *nærri*, *nærstr*, OHG. *nah*, *naher*, *nahist*, Dan. (as E. *former*) *nær*, *nærmere*, *nærmest*, W. *nes*, *nesach*, *nesaf*, near, nearer, nearest.
Neat. I. Fr. *net*, Lat. *nitidus*, from *niteo*, to shine.
2. ON. *naut*, an ox. AS. *nyten* is however applied to animals in general, although mostly to cattle. ' *Seo næddre was geappre thonne ealle tha oðre nytenu*,' the serpent was more cunning than all other beasts. The meaning of the word is unintelligent, from AS. *nitan* for *ne witan*, not to know. ' *Tham neatum is gecynde that hi nyton hwæt hi send*,' it is the nature of beasts that they do not know what they are. ' *Tha unsceadwisan neotena*,' the unintelligent beasts.—Boeth. xiv. 3. 2. In the same way the term beast is appropriated in the language of graziers and butchers to an ox. Mod.Gr. *ἄλογον*, signifying irrational (*ἄλογον ζῶον*, brute beast), is appropriated by custom to a horse (of which it is the regular name), as E. *neat* to oxen.
Neb.—Nib. AS. *neb*, beak, then nose, face, countenance. *Neb with neb*, face to face; *neb-wlite*, beauty of countenance; ON. *nebbi*, Du. *nebbe*, *snebbe*, G. *schnabel*, beak of a bird. Sc. *neb*, like E. *nib*, is used for any sharp point, as the *neb* of a pen, of a knife. N. *nibba*, *nibbestein*, sharp projecting rock. ON. *nibba*, also a promontory; *nibbaz* (of oxen), to butt each other.
As *nab* represents the sound of a blow with a large or rounded implement, *nib* or neb. seems to represent that of a small or pointed one. Du. knip, a flip, crack; knippen, snippen, to clip, snip. G. schnabel, Du. snabel, beak, is that with which the bird snaps; snabben, to peck, bite, snatch.—Kil.
Nebula. Lat. nebula, Gr. νεφέλη, a thin cloud, mist; nubes, νέφος, cloud, Sanscr. nabhas, heaven; ὄροφος, darkness; κνέφας, darkness, twilight.
Necessary.—Necessity. Lat. necesse, of need, that cannot be avoided.
Neck. AS. hnecca, the back of the head, neck; Dan. nakke, nape of the neck and back part of the head. At böie nakken for, to bend the neck to. ON. hnacki, N. nakkje, the back of the head; nakke hola, the hollow at the back of the neck; Du. nak, nek, nik, the nape, neck. Jemand den nek keeren, to turn one's back to a person; stief van nekke, stiff-necked. Fr. nuque, the nape. The primary meaning, as shown under Nape, is the prominent part at the back of the head. N. nakk, a knoll, prominence on the side of a hill.
Necromancy. Gr. νεκρομαντεία; νεκρὸς, dead, μαντεία, divination, soothsaying.
-nect. —nex. Lat. necto, nexum, to knit, join; as in Connect, Annex.
Need. AS. nead, neadhâd, necessity; nead-nyman, to take by force; Du. nood, G. noth, need, want, distress, affliction; Russ. nudit', Boh. nutiti, to constrain; Russ. nuzhd, need, indigence, want. The explanation of the word is to be found in ON. gnaud, naud, fremitus, the noise made by violent action of any kind, the dashing of ships together, clashing of swords, roaring of flame. Skipa gnaud, fremitus navium; hræðilig hjorva gnaud, the dreadful clash of swords. Gnauda, nauda, fremere, strepere, vel assidue premere, affligere, vexare. The expression representing the audible accompaniment of violent action is first transferred to the effect produced on the object upon which the action is exerted, and then to the abstract idea of violence, force, compulsion. Elld gnaudadi vida um eyjar, the fire roared wide among the islands. Ræfr thola naud, igne violantur tecta, the roofs suffer the violence [of fire]. Viðr thola naud, the ship endures the battering [of the waves], vexatur fluctibus. Nauda, to press hard upon; nauðga, to offer violence to, to compel.
Needfire. Fire produced by friction of two pieces of wood (Jam.), G. notfeur, Sw. gnida, to rub. Like need (according to our explanation), from the sound accompanying all effective exertion of force. ON. gnydr, aquarum strepitus. ' Illos sacrilegos ignes quos nedfir vocant, sive omnes—paganorum observationes diligenter prohibeant.'—Capit. Car. Mag. in Duc. The peasants in many parts of Germany were accustomed on St John's eve to kindle a fire by rubbing a rope rapidly to and fro round a stake, and applying the ashes to superstitious purposes.
Needle. Goth. nethla, OHG. nâdala, nâlda, Du. naelde, ON. nâl, Bret. nadoz, W. nodwydd, Gael. snathad, Manx snaid, a needle. Du. naeden, naeyen, OHG. nagan, nawan, nâan, G. nâhen, to sew; W. noden, Gael. snath, Manx snaie, thread. Fin. negla, neula, a needle; knuppi-neula (a headed needle), a pin; neuliainen (a stinger), a wasp. Esthon. noggel, nööl, a needle, sting of an insect; nöggeue, nogges, a stinging-nettle. In the foregoing forms we may perhaps detect a root nad, nag, signifying prick or sting, which may explain Goth. nadr, W. neidr, AS. naddre, an adder.
Nefarious. Lat. fas, right, justice; nefas, wickedness.
Negation.—Negative. Lat. nego, Sw. neka, ON. neikvada, to say ne, no, to; OE. to nick with nay. On her knees they kneleden adoun And prayden hym off hys benisoun; He nykkyt hem with nay. Rom. of Athelstone in Hal. To the above are opposed Lat. aio, Sw. jaka, MHG. jehen, G. bejahen, to say aye or ja to, to affirm.
Neglect.—Negligent. Lat. negligo, neglectum, to have little regard for. Perhaps formed as a negation of eligo, to pick out, to choose.
Negotiate. Lat. negotium, business.
Negro. Sp. negro, Lat. niger, black.
Neif. A female serf. Lat. nativa.
To Neigh. AS. hnægan, ON. hneggia, Sw. gnagga, N.Fris. nögern, Sussex, to knucker, Pl.D. nichen, Fr. hennir, It. nitrire, all representing the sound. Sc. nicher, nicker, to neigh, to laugh coarsely.
Neighbour. AS. neah-bur, neah-man, G. nachbar, Du. buur, Dan. nabo, fem. naboerske, neighbour. From AS. neah, nigh, near, and Dan. boe, G. bauen, to till, cultivate, dwell. G. bauer, a boor, cultivator, peasant. Dan. bo, a dwelling. AS. neah-gehuse, neighbours.
Neither. AS. nâther, nawther, from the negative ne and either:
Neive. ON. hnefi, knefi, a fist, handful. Hence Sc. nevel, navel, to strike with the fist; niffer, to exchange, to pass from one neive to another.
Neophyte. Gr. νεόφυτος, recently planted, applied to newly-made Christians; νέος, new, and φύω, to beget, give birth to.
Nepe. See Turnip.
Nephew.— Nepotism. From Lat. nepos, -otis, descendant, Venet. nevodo, neodo, and thence by the common conversion of an internal d to u, or y, Fr. neveu, Sc. nevoy, E. nephew. One of the instances in which the Lap. agrees in so singularly close a manner with Lat. is seen in Lap. nápat, sister's son.
Nerve. Lat. nervus, a sinew; Gr. νεύρον.
Nescock. One that was never from home, a fondling.— B. Bav. nestquack, nestkack, Pl.D. nestkiken, the youngest bird of a brood, youngest child in a family. G. quack, quackel, quackelchen, nestquack, a young unfledged bird, fig. a child of old age. Das quakelchen seines alters. From quaken, to cry. Der kinder gequak; ein jammervoll gequeck.
Nesh. AS. hnesc, tender, soft, weak. Properly moist. Goth. natjan, G. benetzen, to wet; G. nass, Du. nat, wet; Fin. neste, moisture; nuoska, Esthon. niisk, wet; Lat. Notus, the (moist) South wind.
Nest. Pol. gniazdo, nest, breed; Bret. neiz, w. nyth, Gael. nead, Lat. nidus.
Net. 1. Goth. nati, Fin. nuotta, ON. not, G. netz, Bret. neud.
2. See Neat.
Nether. ON. neðan, under; neðri, lower, neðstr, lowest (adj.); G. nieder, lower; AS. neothan, beneath; neotheweard, downwards.
Nettle. G. nessel, Pl.D. nettel, Sw. nessla, N. netla, Dan. nælde, ON. nótr, nótru-gras, from nótra, to shiver, probably in the sense of tingling with pain. Cleveland nodder, to tremble, shake; Bav. notteln, to shake, to rock. In a similar way G. zitter-aal, the electric eel. from zittern, to shiver.
Neuter. Lat. neuter, neither.
New. Goth. niujo, ON. nyr, Bret. nevez, Gael. nuadh, Lat. novus, Gr. νέος, Sanscr. nawa.
News. In the sense of intelligence there is probably a confusion of two words—1. news, Fr. nouvelles, new things, and 2. Dan. nys, properly scent, wind, hint, inkling, intimation. AS. fáæ nys, to get wind of a thing, to get news of it. ON. hnýsa, to search for, spy out; hnýsinn, curious. Du. neuselen, to sniff after, to scent out; neuswijs, sagacious, having good scent, curious.
Newt. A water-lizard. Otherwise ewt, evet, eft.
-nex. See -nect.
Next. AS. neah, near, nigh; nehst, nyhst, nighest, next, last. Æt nyhstan, at last. Seohthen ich was ischriven nexst, since I was last shriven.—Ancr. Riwle 320.
Nias. It. nido, nidio, nest; nidare, nidiare, to nestle; nidace, nidaso falcone, an eyas hawk, a young hawk taken out of her nest.— Fl. Fr. niais, a nestling, novice, simple and inexperienced gull.— Cot.
To Nibble. Du. knabbelen, knibbelen, to nibble, also (as Fin. napista) to grumble, wrangle, bargain; knabbeler. Fin. napista, a quarrelsome person; G. knaupeln, to gnaw, pick a bone, nibble; Swiss knübeln, to pick, work with a pointed implement; Pl.D. knappern, knuppern, knubbern, to munch dry hard food with a crunching noise, to nibble as mice or rats—Danneil; G. knappen, to gnaw, bite, pick, or nibble—Küttn.; Pl.D. knabbeln, gnabbeln, gnawweln, to gnaw audibly. Dat gnabbelt'n mus. When the noise is somewhat finer it is replaced by gnibbeln, knibbeln, nibbeln, to nibble, eat by little bits, like a goat.—Danneil. Fin. napsaa, to sound as the teeth in gnawing, to strike lightly.
Nice. 1. From Fr. nice, foolish, simple; Prov. nesci, Ptg. nescio, Sp. necio, foolish, imprudent, ignorant; Lat. nescius, ignorant.
Ainçois s'en joue à la pelotte, Comme pucelle nice et sotte.—R. R. 6920.
Nicette fut et ne pensoit À nul mal engin quel qu'il soit, — Mais moult estoit joyeuse et gaye. —Ibid. 1230.
In Chaucer's translation: Nice [simple] she was but she ne mente None harme ne sleight in her entente.
For he was nyce and knoweth no wisdome. R. G. * 2. Probably nice in the modern sense may be wholly distinct from the foregoing, and may be explained from Pl.D. nusseln, nustern, Hessian nusseln, nisseln, nisseln, naüseln, nöseln, to sniff at one's food, to turn one's meat over like a dog with his snout, to eat without appetite, be nice in eating, to pick and choose; nessel, nice in eating. The term then would apply in the first instance to hesitations or scruples in eating, and subsequently in dealing with other things. — Marcus Cato—never made ceremony or niceness to praise himself openly.—Holland, Plutarch.
Niche. Fr. niche. It. nicchio, nicchia, a recess for a statue in a wall, also a nick or nock.—Fl. A nick in the wall.
Nick.—Notch. It. nicchio, a nick or nock; nocchia, nocca, a nock, notch, or knuckle, as of a bow, or of one's fingers. G. knick, the clear sound of a weak or slender body when it gets suddenly a chink, crack, or burst. Das Glas hat einen Knick, the glass gave a crack. Also the crack or chink that takes its rise with such a sound.—Küttn. Einen Knick in einen Zweig machen, to crack or break a twig. Ein Reis knicken, to half break and half bend a young branch.
The notion of a nick or notch may be taken from a crack in a hard body, but more frequently probably from the image of a sharp, sudden movement, represented by the sound knick or knock. G. nicken, to nod, to wink; N. nokka, to rock; nykkje, to pluck or twitch. Then, as in similar cases, the term is applied to an indentation or projection. So from Fr. hocher, to nod, jog, shake, hoche, oche, a nick or notch. See Cog. It should be observed that It. nocchio is not only a notch but a projection, a knot or knob.
Nick. 2.—Old Nick. Pl.D. Nikker, the hangman, also the Devil as the executioner prepared for the condemned of the human race at the great day of judgment. The same office is ascribed to him in the ordinary G. exclamation der Henker! hole mich der Henker! the Devil take me: not the ordinary hangman.
AS. hnescan, Du. nekken, to kill. Den nek breken, to break one's neck, to kill one. So in E. slang, to scrag, to hang, from scrag, the neck; nubbing, hanging, nub, the neck. Magy. nyak, the neck, nyakasni, decollare, to behead.
Nickname, Ekename or nekename, agnomen.—Pr. Pm. ON. auknefni, Sw. öknamn, G. eich-, ekel-, okel-, neck-, okername, a surname, nickname. Taken separately we should explain auknefni, ekename, from ON. auk, E. eke, in addition, besides; nickname, as a name given in derision, from Fr. faire la nique, to jeer, or G. necken, to tease or plague.
Susurro, a privy whisperer that slandereth, backbiteth, and nicketh one's name.—Junius Nomenclator in Pr. Pm.
But the great variety of forms looks more like a series of corruptions of a common original, which being no longer understood has been accidentally modified or twisted in different directions in order to suit the meaning. And such an original may perhaps be found in Lap. likenamm. Fin. liika nimi, Esthon. liig nimmi, a by-name, surname, the first element of which in the three languages signifies in excess of, beside. Esthon. liig-te (te, way), a by-way, wrong road; liig-juus, false hair, a wig. The original meaning of the word is probably side, whence Esthon. liggi. Fin. liki, near. The same element may be recognised in W. llysenw, Bret. leshano, a surname, nickname, the first element of which is used exactly as the Finnish particle. Bret. les-tad, a step-father; W. llysblant, step-children; Bret. lez, a haunch, border, and as a prep. near; W. llysu, to set aside; ystlys, a side, a flank.
The change from an initial l to n is seen in It. livello, nivello, level; Lat. lympha and nympha; It. lanfa and nanfa, orange-flower water; Fr. lentille and nentille, a lentil, &c.
Nidget. See Niggle.
Niece. OFr. niepce, niece.—Cot. The dialect of Champagne has nieps, nies, nephew; niepce, niece, from Lat. nepos.
Nifle. A trifle. Norman niveloter, to amuse oneself with trifles. Niffnaffs, trifles, knicknacks.—Hal. The radical image is a snap with the fingers, used as a type of something worthless, as when we snap our fingers, and say I don't care that for you. Fr. niquet, a knicke, tlicke, snap with the fingers, a trifle, nifle, bauble, matter of small value. G. knipp, a snap or fillip with the fingers; Fr. nipes, trash, nifles, trifles.—Cot. See Knicknack.
Niggard. The habit of attention to minute gains in earning money is closely connected with a careful unwillingness to spend, and the primary meaning of niggard is one who scrapes up money by little and little. N. nyggja, to gnaw, rub, scrape; Sw. njugga ihop penningar, to scrape up money; njugga med ett i penningar, to keep one short of money; njugg, niggardly, sparing; Lap. någget, to scrape together; N. gnika, to rub, to drudge, to seek pertinaciously for small advantages; gnikjen, nikjen, nuggjen, stingy, scraping, explaining OE. niggen, while Pl.D. gnegeln, to be miserly, N. nikker, stingy, correspond to NE. naggre, a miserly person.
The same ultimate reference to the idea of rubbing is found in Dan. gnide, to rub; gnidsk, niggardly; Bav. fretten, to rub, to earn a scanty living with pains and difficulty; It. frugare, to rub, to pinch and spare miserably, to spend or feed sparingly, to use frugality.—Fl.
To Niggle. To trifle, nibble, eat or do anything mincingly.—Hal. To work in a niggling way is to do a thing by repeated small efforts, like a person nibbling at a bone. Swiss niggele, operam suam in re parvi manuarii collocare.—Idiot. Bernense in Deutsch. Mundart.
To Haggle, to gnaw.—Hal. Sw. nagga, to gnaw, to nibble; N. gnaga, to gnaw, to toil assiduously with little effect; gnika, to rub, to work slow and in a petty way.
To nig, to clip money; nigged ashlar, stone worked with a pointed hammer.—Hal.

Nigh. See Near.

Night. Goth. nahts, Lat. nox (noct'), W. nos, Slav. noc (nots), Lith. naktis. We might fancy that the ultimate signification was a negation of light, ne-light, ne-lux, as Ir. sorcha, light, bright; dorcha, dark; Lat. nolle for ne-velle.

Nightingale. G. nachtigall, the bird that sings by night. ON. gala, to sing, to crow like a cock, the origin of Lat. gallus.

Nightmare. See Mare.

Nightshade. Sw. dial. skata, a mag-pie; nattskata, a nightjar; nattskategräs, G. nachtschade, nightshade.

To Nim. To take by stealth. Goth. nimnan, Lith. imti, to take; ON. nema, to take, take away. See Introduction.

Nimble. AS. nimol, capax, tenax, rapax.—Lye. ON. nema, nam, numit, to take, and hence, as Dan. nemme, to learn, to apprehend; nem, quick of apprehension, handy, adroit. Den nemmeste maade, the readiest way.

Nincompoop. A corruption of non compos mentis, the legal phrase for a person not in possession of his mind.

Nine. Lat. novem, Gr. ἐννέα, ON. níu, W. naw, Sanscr. navan.

Ninny. Sp. niño, an infant, a childish person; niñear, to behave in a childish manner. Mod.Gr. νίνιον, a child, doll, simpleton; μέγαλου νίνιον, a great ninny. The origin of the word is doubtless the sing-song humming used to set a child to sleep. Sp. nini-nana, words without meaning for the humming of a tune; Mod.Gr. νάνα, lullaby; It. ninna ninna, words used to still children; ninnare, ninnellare, to lull children asleep.

To Nip.—Nippers, G. knipp, a snap or fillip with the fingers. Einem ein Knippchen, Klippchen geben, to give one a fillip. Knippen, schnippen, to snap; Knip-käulchen, Pl.D. knippel, knicker, a marble impelled by filliping with the fingers.
To nip is to pinch by an implement that shuts with a snap. Dan. nappe, to snap, twitch, pluck; nappe-tang, nippers, pincers; Lap. nappet, to lop, crop, cut off the extremities; nappar pelji, crop-eared.

Nipple. A dim. of neb or nib. Neble of a woman's pap, bout de la mamelle.—Palsgr. Fin. näppy, nyppy, nyppyllä, a pimple, wart, bud. The nipple is in G. termed brustwarze, breast-wart. Esthon. nip, point, end.

Nithing. An abject, vile fellow, a coward.—B. ON. níða, to abuse, disgrace, befoul. Níðaz á trú sinni, to desert his faith. Níðingr, an infamous person, coward, niggard, traitor. Níð, a lampoon, contumely, abuse. Perhaps the word originally signified nothing worse than a miser; féníðingr, mat-níðingr, a niggard of money or of food; níðskr, Dan. gnidsk, sordidè tenax, from gnide, to rub or scrape. In the N. of E. nithing is used for sparing; 'nithing of his pains.'—B.

No. See Nay.

Noble.—Nobility. Lat. nobilis, nobilitas; from nosco, novi, to know.

Nock.—Notch. Norm. noque, notch; It. nocchio, nocco, a bunch, knob, knur, snag or ruggedness in any tree or wood, the knuckle-bones, hard stone of a fruit, also the nock of a bow or notch in anything.—Fl.
The fundamental image is an abrupt movement suddenly checked, represented by a sharp report, and thence an indentation or projection. Gael. cnag, to crack, snap the fingers, knock, rap; E. dial. nog, to jog. So from Fr. hocher, to jog, hoche, oche, a notch. See Nick.

Nocturnal. Lat. nox, noctis, night.

Nod. Bav. notteln, to move to and fro; an der thür notteln, to shake at the door; OHG. hnutten, vibrare.—Schm.
ON. hníoða (hnýð, hnáuð, hnoðit), to hammer; Du. knodse, a cudgel. To nod is to make a movement as if striking with the head. The E. word has no immediate connection with Lat. nutus, the t of which belongs to the frequentative form of the verb.

Noddle. The noddle, noddock, or niddock is properly the projecting part at the back of the head, the nape of the neck, then ludicrously used for the head itself. Occiput, a nodyle.—Hal.
After that fasten cupping glasses to the noddle of the necke.—Burroughes in Nares.
ON. hnoð, the round head of a nail; Du. knod, knodde, a knob; Dan. knude, a knot, bump, protuberance; Lat. nodus. It. nodo, a knot; nodo del collo, the nape of the neck; nodello (identical in form with E. noddle), the ankle-bone.
Noddy. A silly fellow.—B. Nodcock, noddypoll, noddypate, a simpleton. Noddy-headed, tipsy.—Hal. The meaning is probably one whose head is in a whirl. In the same way noggy, tipsy, from nog, to jog. Compare totty, dizzy, with totter, to stagger. It. noddo, a silly-pate.—Fl. Norman naudin, s. s.—Cot.
Node.—Nodose. Lat. nodus, a knot, nodosus.
Noggin. A mug. Gael. cnag, knock, rap, thump, a knob, peg, pin; cnagaidh, bunchy; cnagaire, a knocker, a gill, noggin, quart-measure; cnagare, a little knob, an earthen pipkin.
\* Noise. Fr. noise, rumbling, stir, wrangle, brawl; Prov. nausa, nosa, noysa, noise, dispute. Applied in R. R. to the murmur of water.
S'en aloit l'iaue aval, fesant Une noise douce et plesant.
The original sense, however (in which, in E. it is still chiefly used), is that of disagreeable, importunate sound, and the most probable origin is Lat. noxa, noxia (from noceo, to hurt), something hurtful, injury, brawl, disturbance. In mediam noxam perfertur.—Petron. Sæpe in conjugiis fit noxia si nimia est dos.—Anson. Flem. noose, noxa, malum, damnum, et lis, dissidia.—Kil.
\* Noisome. Having power to noy or injure.
Thei had tailis like scorpiouns—and the might of them was to noye men fyve monethis.—Wiclif.
It. noiare, to annoy, molest, trouble; noia, noianza, annoyance, molestation. ODu. noeyen, noyen, vernoeyen, obesse, nocere, molestum esse; noeylick, noyclick, noisome.—Kil. It is impossible to separate the foregoing from It. annoiare, Fr. ennuyer, E. annoy, which have satisfactorily been traced to Lat. in odio esse, and the Du. noode, unwillingly, against the grain, probably comes from the same source. Entirely distinct are Lat. nocere, Prov. nozer, OFr. nuisir, Fr. nuire, to hurt, whence It. nocevole, Fr. nuisible, injurious; nuisance, injury, hurt.
Noll.—Nowl. The head. AS. cnoll, a knoll, hill, top, summit; G. knollen, a knob, lump, tumour, protuberance. Vertex, knoll.—AS. Vocab.
Nomad. Gr. νομας, from νεμω, to pasture flocks.
Nominal.—Nominee. Lat. nomen, a name.

-nomy. Gr. νομος, a law, order.
Nonce. For the nonce, for the special occasion.
Tha that word him com to That Brutes wolden ther don, And comen to than anes To fæchen tha stanes.
—When news came to him what the Britons were about to do, and that they were coming for that only, to fetch the stones.—Layamon, Brut. II. 301.
To than ane icoren, chosen for the special purpose.—Ibid. 2. 279.
Nonpareil. Fr. pareil, from L.Lat. pariculus, dim. from Lat. par, equal.—Scheler.
Nook. A corner. Four-nokede it is, it (a piece of water) is four-cornered.—Layamon 2. 500. Gael. niuc, a corner, nook. Fin. nokka, the beak of a bird, nose, point; maan nokka, lingula terræ, a nook of land; nokkia, to peck; Esthon. nuk, a knuckle, pummel, button; nukka, a tip, corner, nook; Wal. nonk, knot, excrescence.
The radical meaning is a projection either outwards or inwards, and it is essentially the same with nock, notch. So It. cocca, a notch, is the same with E. cog.
Noon. The Roman day was divided into 12 hours, from sunrise to sunset, so that the ninth hour, hora nona, would be about three o'clock in the afternoon. In Norway non or nun is still used in this sense, signifying the third meal or resting-time of the day, held at two, three, or four o'clock, according to custom. Nona, to lunch, to take the intermediate meal or repose; nonsbil, the hour of non, about three or four in the afternoon.
The transference of the signification from mid-afternoon to mid-day seems to have taken place through an alteration in the time of the canonical services, of which seven were performed in the day, matutina, prima, tertia, sexta, nona, vespera, completorium. It is plain that four of these must be named from the hours at which they were originally celebrated, but we find that nona, the fifth service, was held in Italy about mid-day at an early period.
Montando lo sole prima la prima parte, fa terza; la seconda, sesta; la terza, nona, e siamo a mezzodi (the sun having climbed the third part of the heavens performs nones, and we are at mid-day); poi comincia a discendere, e scesa la prima parte fa mezzo vespro, &c.—La Crusca.
Nona, mittag-zyt, myddach.—Dief. Sup.
Tho bygonne tenebres that into al the eorthe were ydon In the sixte tyd of the day that me clupeth noon.

Hit bygan at non and for to the nynthe tyde ylaste That wolde be midovernon.—Festival Metri in R.
It is probably in memory of the time at which the service of nones was originally performed that it is still announced by nine strokes of the bell. ' L'Angelus de midi venait de sonner, mais bien des gens n'avaient pas entendu les neuf coups, et partant avaient oublié de reciter l'oraison accoutumée.'—Madame Claude, p. 1, 1862.
Noose. Lang. nous-couren, a running knot or noose ; nouzelut, knotty. Nous, nils, nouzel, a knot.—Dict. Castrais. From Lat. nodus.
Nor. Nor, ne or.
Normal.—Enormous. Lat. norma, a square for trying right angles, thence pattern, rule ; normalis, according to rule, a right angle, perpendicular line ; enormis, out of rule, irregular, huge. Gr. γνώμων, a rule.
North. ON. norðr, Fr. nord.
Nose. AS. næse, G. nase, Lat. nasus, Lith. nosis, Pol. nos, Russ. nos'.
The name of the nose is probably taken from an imitation of noises made through the nose, 'as G. niesen, to sneeze, Dan. snuse, to snuff or sniff. So Gael. sròn, the nose, compared with E. snore; Gr. ῥύγχος, snout, muzzle, beak, face (properly nose), compared with ῥόγχος, a snoring, ῥέγχω, to snore, snort. See Nozzle.
Nostril. AS. nas-thyrla, næsthyrel; from thyrel, a hole, aperture ; G. thürle, dim. of thüre, a door. On tham wage thyril geworht, made an aperture in the wall.—Bede. Thurhcrypth ælc thyrel, creeps through every hole.—Boeth. Nædle thyrel, the eye of a needle. See Thirl.
Nostrum. Lat. nostrum, ours, peculiar to ourselves.
Not.—Nought. AS. naht, nauht, noht, nought, not; OHG. niowiht, nieht, G. nicht, not, from the negative particle ni, and Goth. waihts, AS. wiht, G. wicht, a whit, thing. So in Romance, from ne and ens, a being. It. niente, nothing, OFr. nient, not. ' Detenus en garde et nient allantz à large,' not going at large.—Liber Albus, p. 215. Nient countreesteaunt, notwithstanding.—Ibid. p. 216.
Note.—Notable.—Notary.—Notice.—Notion. Lat. nota, a mark, sign; nosco, notum, to know.
Noun. Fr. nom, Lat. nomen, a name.
-nounce. -nunc-. Lat. nuncius, a messenger; nuncio, to bear tidings, bring word of, tell. Hence Announce, Pronounce, Renounce, &c.
To Nourish.—Nurse.—Nurture.

From Lat. nutrio, to suckle or feed young, we pass to Fr. nourrir, and thence to E. nourish. In the same way Lat. nutrix gives rise to Fr. nourrice and E. nurse. From nourrir was formed nourriture, which was converted into E. nurture, as nourrice into nurse. For the origin of nutrio see Nuzzle.
Novel. Lat. novellus (novus, new), Fr. nouvel
November. Lat. November.
Now. AS. nu, Gr. νῦν, Lat. nunc.
Noxious. Lat. noxius ; noxa, that which is hurtful ; noceo, to hurt.
* Nozzle. The nose, snout, projecting part of anything, as of a bellows.—Worcester. Pl.D. nüssel, the nose.—Deutsch. Mundart. v. 73.
From Pl.D. nusseln, E. nuzzle, to sniff after, to seek with the nose like a dog (Brem. Wtb.) ; Bav. nuseln, to snuffle or speak through the nose, to poke the nose into (in etwas herumsuchen) ; nueschen, to sniff about, to root in like a swine. In the same way Pl.D. snuss, the snout, is related to snusseln, synonymous with nusseln, above-mentioned ; Dan. snude, Bav. schnud, snout, to schnauden, schnödeln, to snuff, pant, draw breath, and Sw. dial. snok, Lith. snukkis, snout, muzzle, to Sw. snoka, to snoke or snook, to smell, to search out, pry into.
-nude.—Nudity. Lat. nudus, naked.
Nudge. Austrian nussen, to thrust or strike, especially with the fist.—Deutsch. Mundart. ii. Pl.D. nutsche gien, to cuff.—Ibid. v. 173. Swiss motschen, to thrust or press, to make another give way ; mutschen, to strike with the fist.
Nuel.—Newel. As Fr. noyau, the spindle of a winding staircase. Noyau is also the kernel of a nut, stone of a peach, plum, &c., mould in the hollow of a piece of ordnance when it is cast, anything contained in a hollow envelope.
From Lat. nux, nucis, a nut, Lang. nougalh, noualh, kernel of nut.—Dict. Castr. W. cnewyll, kernel.
Nugatory. Lat. nugæ, trifles.
Nugget. A lump of native gold, a dim. of W.E. nug, a block, a knob or protuberance ; Essex nigg, a small piece.—Hal. In North's Plutarch, p. 499, it is written niggot. ' After the fire was quenched they found in niggots (lumps) of gold and silver mingled together about a thousand talents.' Hence Trench inclines to the supposition that nugget is only ingot disguised.
Nuisance. Fr. nuire, nuisaut, from Lat. nocere, to hurt, as luire, luisant, from *lucere*, to shine ; nuisance, hurt, damage, wrong, trespass.—Cot.
Nuke. Fr. *nucque*, the hinder part of the head. See Nape.
Numb.—Benumb. Goth., AS. *niman*, ON. *nema*, to take, take away ; AS. *beniman*, *benam*, *benumen*, to take away, deprive, to stupefy ; ON. *numinn*, taken away ; *numinn viti*, as Lat. *mente captus*, deprived of sense, out of his mind.
He may neither go ne come, But altogether he is benome The power both of hande and fete.
Gower in R.
Number.—Numeral.—Numerate. Lat. *numerus*, Fr. *nombre*.
Numbles.—Umbles. The old derivation from *umbilicus* appears on the whole to be the true one. The numbles of a deer comprised various parts of the inwards of the animal from the 'avant-ers' of the neck to the bight of the thighs.
*Noumbles* of a dere or beest, *entrailles*.—Palsgr. *Præcordia*, the numbles, as the hart, the spleene, the lunges and liver.—Elyot. In Sir Gawaine and the Green Knight however, v. 1340, where the cutting out the numbles is elaborately but not very comprehensibly described, they do not include the liver and lungs. It is natural that a portion consisting of the soft parts about the belly should take its name from the navel. And accordingly we find the word in various forms, *nunblicus* (evidently from *umbilicus*), *numbile*, *numbulus*, *numblus*. 'De bove mortuo, pectus ; de porco mortuo, *nunblicum*.'—Duc. 'In quolibet porco a carnifice occiso ad vendendum, les *numbles*, et de quolibet bove—pectus solvere tenebuntur.'—Charta, A.D. 1239, in Duc. A strong confirmation of this derivation appears in the double form of the word, numbles and umbles, with and without a prosthetic n, precisely corresponding to Fr. *nombril* and Prov. *ombrilh* from *umbilicus*.
It is true that the word seems sometimes to be confounded with *lumbulus* or *lumbellus*, which is claimed in some charters on the same occasion as the numbles in others. 'Quicunque de eodem castro occidit porcum ad tallam [to be sold by retail] *præstat lumbellum* qui communiter et vulgariter dicitur *filectum* (the *filet*), curiæ dicti castri.'—Charta, A.D. 1270, in Carp.
But it by no means follows that it is the same part of the animal that is claimed in both cases, and here what is meant by *lumbellus* is clearly explained as the 'filet' or inside meat along the back of the animal, quite a different piece of meat from the numbles. *Lumbulus*, *lentipratin*.—Dief. Supp.
Nun. From It. *nonna*, grandmother, as Gr. *παπᾶς*, a priest, from *papa*, father ; abbot from *abba*, father. The first nuns would naturally be elderly women.
Nuptial. Lat. *nubo*, *nuptum*, to marry ; *nuptiæ*, a marriage.
Nurse. See Nourish.
Nut. AS. *hnut*, G. *nuss*, Gael. *cnudh*, w. *cnau*, Lat. *nux*.
Nutmeg. Fr. *muguette*, *noix muguette*, G. *muscat nuss*, *nux moschata*, from the drug musk taken as the type of anything highly-scented, whence also the names of several highly-scented flowers. Languedoc *mugue*, Sp. *muscari*, the hyacinth ; Fr. *muguet* (formerly *musguet*—Diez), woodruff, lily of the valley.
Nutriment.—Nutrition. Lat. *nutrio*, *nutritum*, to nourish. See Nuzzle.
To Nuzzle.—Nuddle. To nuzzle, nuddle, to creep closely or snugly as an infant in the bosom of its mother.—Mrs Baker. Properly to sniff after the breast, to seek it out with the mouth and nose, as Bav. *nuseln*, *nueschen*, *nuesien*, to sniff after, pry into, search about as a swine with his snout. So, with the addition of an initial *s*, Pl.D. *snusseln*, to sniff, search about, especially for food. 'Dat kind *snusselt au den titte*'—the child nuzzles up to the breast.—Brem. Wtb. E. dial. *snoozling*, nestling.—Hal. Da. *snuse*, N. *snusla*, to snuff, sniff. In the same way nuddle corresponds to forms like ON. *snudda*, to sniff after, Bav. *schnauden*, *schnodeln*, to snuff, pant, sniff.
To the latter class also belong G. dial. *schnudern*, to snuffle or speak through the nose, to sniff, ON. *snudra*, *snoðra*, N. *snutra*, to sniff or seek after food, like a hound with the snout. The transition from the last of these forms to Lat. *nutrio* is exactly similar to that which takes place in the meaning of E. nuzzle, when transferred from the action of the infant to that of the nurse. To nuzzle, applied to the infant, is to seek after the breast ; and conversely, of the mother, it signifies to press the babe to the breast, to caress, nourish, bring up.
Mothers who to *nousle* up their babes Thought nought too curious.—Pericles.
Old men long *nozzled* [nursed] in corruption.—Sidney in Todd.
Surely I take almost every one to be of that quality wherein he is *nusled*, and afterwards taught by another's example.—Passenger of Benevento in Nares.
Nymph. Gr. *νύμφη*, Lat. *nympha*, a water-spirit.

Oaf. A simpleton, blockhead. Formerly more correctly written auf, ouph, from ON. alfr, an elf or fairy. When an infant was found to be an idiot it was supposed to be an imp left by the fairies, in the room of the proper child carried away to their own country, whence an idiot is sometimes called a changeling, a term explained by Bailey, a child changed, also a fool, a silly fellow or wench.

These when a child haps to be got Which after proves an idiot.
When folks perceive it thriveth not, The fault therein to smother, Some silly doating brainless calf— Say that the fairy left this aulf And took away the other.
Drayton, Nymphidia in R.
Shakespear uses ouphe for elf or fairy.
—my little son And three or four more of their growth we'll dress As urchins, ouphes, and fairies.—Merry Wives.

Oak. AS. ac, ON. eyk, G. eiche.
Oakum.—Ockam. Old ropes untwisted or reduced to fibre for calking ships. AS. dcumbi, dcembi, OHG. dcambi, stoppa, tow ; MHG. hanef-dcamb, the combings or hards of hemp, tow, what is combed out in dressing it ; as dswinc, the refuse swingled out in dressing flax. Stuppa pectitur ferreis hamis, donec omnis membrana decorticatur.—Pliny xxix. 1. 3, cited by Aufrecht in Phil. Trans.
Oar. ON. ar, Fin., Lap. airo, Esthon. aer, air.
Oast. Hop-oast, a kiln for drying hops, a word probably imported from the Netherlands, together with the cultivation of hops. Du. ast, est, a kiln.
Oath. AS. ath, Goth, aith, G. eid.
Oats. AS. ata, Fris. oat, oat ; as. at, ON. ata, food, ceti, eatables.
Ob-. Oc-. Of-. Op-. Lat. ob, against, over against. In comp. with words beginning with c, f, p, the b is assimilated with the following consonant.
Obdurate. Lat. durus, hard ; obduro, to harden oneself against.
Obedience.—Obeisance.—Obey. Lat. audio, to hear; obedio, Fr. obéir, obéissant, to listen to a command, to obey, as Gr. ἀκούω, to hear, ὑπακούω, to listen to, to obey.
Obelisk. Gr. ὀβελός, a spit, a pointed object, ὀβελίσκος, a pointed pillar.
Obese. Lat. obesus, gross, fat.
Obit.—Obituary. Lat. obeo, -itum, to go through with ; obire diem ultimum, to pass one's last day, to die ; obitus, death.
Oblige. Lat. ligo, to bind or tie; obligo, to tie up, to engage or bind in a metaphorical sense.
Oblique. Lat. obliquus.
Obliterate. Lat. oblittero, to blot out, cancel, from ob and littera, properly to draw something over the letters, perhaps to cancel the writing on a waxen tablet by passing over it with the broad end of the style. Not from litura, a blot or blur, a streak or dash through writing, the i of which is short, or the compound oblino, oblitum, to dawb or smear over.
Oblivion. Lat. obliviscor, oblitus, to forget. Perhaps from liveo, livesco, to become dark. To forget is to have a thing become dark to one.
Obscene. Lat. obscænus, of bad augury, ominous, abominable, filthy.
Obscure. Lat. obscurus.
Obstacle. Lat. obstaculum ; obstare, to stand in the way of.
Oc-. For ob- before words beginning with a c, as in occludo, to shut against ; occurro, to run up, to occur, &c.
Occult. Lat. occulo, -cultum, to cover over, to hide, from celo, to hide.
Occupy. Lat. occupo, to lay hold of before, to take first, from capio.
Ocean. Gr. Ὠκεανός, Lat. oceanus.
Ochre. A yellow or brown coloured earth used as a pigment. Gr. ὠχρός, pale, yellow ; ὤχρα, ochre.
Oct-. Octave.—Octagon. Gr. ὀκτώ, Lat. octo, eight.
Ocular. Lat. oculus, an eye. See Eye.
Odd. When a number is conceived as odd or even the units of which it is composed are regarded as piled up one by one in two parallel columns. If the number be divisible by two the columns will reach to the same height, or the highest units will be even with each other, and the number is called even; but if there be a remaining unit it will project like a point above the top of the parallel column, and the number is called odd, N. odde, from oddr, a point. The term is then extended to any object left sticking up, as it were, by itself, for want of another to match it. Odious. Lat. odium, hatred, ill-will.

Odour.—Odoriferous. Lat. odor, a smell; Gr. ὀδμή, perf. ὀδώδα, Lat. oleo, to smell.

Of-. See Ob-.

Off.—Off. Lat. ab, ON. af, Gr. ἀπό.

Offal. G. dial. abfall, abgefall, refuse or dross, what falls from; Dan. affald, fall, falling away, offal, the fall of the leaf, windfalls in an orchard, broken sticks in a wood, &c.

Office.—Official. Lat. officium, one's business, moral duty; officialis, a servant or attendant on a magistrate.

Oft.—Often. ON. opt, Goth. ufta.

Ogee.—Ogive. It. augivo, Fr. ogive, ogive, the union of concave and convex in an arch or fillet.

To Ogle. G. äugeln, to inoculate, also to eye one slyly, from auge, an eye. Fr. œillade. It. occhiata, a glance.

Ogre. Sp. ogro, Fr. ogre, OSp. huergo, uerco, the man-eating giant of fairy-tales;—Diez; It. orco, a surname of Pluto, by met. any chimera or imagined monster.—Fl. Cimbr. orco, (böses gespenst) bug-gaboo.—Bergmann. From Lat. orcus, hell.

Her marble-minded breast, impregnable, rejects The ugly orks that for their lord the Ocean woo. Polyolbion in Nares.

Oil.—Olive. Lat. oleum, G. oel, Gr. ἔλαιον, oil; ἐλαία, Lat. oliva, the olive or oil tree.

Ointment. Lat. unguere, and thence Fr. oindre, to anoint; It. unto, salve, grease; untare, ontare, to salve or smear.

Old. AS. eald, G. alt, Goth. altheis, old. The radical meaning is probably grow up, from Goth. alan, to nourish, bring up; ON. ala, to beget, give birth to, nourish; elna, to grow, to ripen. Lat. alere, to nourish; adolesco, to grow up; coalesco, to grow together, &c. See Abolish. Diefenbach compares Lat. altus, as signifying grown up in space, as old in time.

Omelet. Fr. aumelette, omelette, of unknown origin.

Omen.—Ominous. Lat. omen, a sign of luck, good or bad.

Omni-. Lat. omnis, all, every.

On. G. an, Gr. ἀνά, up, on, upon.

One. Gr. εἷς, μία, ἕν, Lat. unus, Goth. ains, G. ein.

Onerous. Lat. onus, -eris, a burden.

Onion. Lat. unio, an onion, then, from the concentric scales of which it is formed, applied to a pearl.

Onomatopoeia. Gr. ὀνοματοποιΐα, from ὀνοματοποιέω, to coin words, especially to form words in imitation of sound. Ὄνομα, name, and ποιέω, to make. In later times the word has been confined to the special signification above mentioned. It was early observed that such words as λίγγω, to twang like a bow, σίζω, to hiss, balare, to bleat, hinnire, to neigh, were exactly such as we should frame if we attempted to represent the sounds in question by a vocal imitation. It was accordingly supposed that a certain class of words had been formed by the imitation of natural sounds, and as these were the only class of simple words in which evidence remained of their having been formed by the device of man, the name of ὀνοματο-ποιΐα or word-making was given to the process to which they owe their origin, a name which obviously becomes improper as soon as we regard all language as formed by man.

Onyx. Lat. onyx, from Gr. ὄνυξ, the nail of the finger.

Ooze. AS. wos, juice; afetes wos, juice of fruit; wosig, juicy, moist. To ooze out is to show moisture at the cracks, moisture to find its way out by small apertures. ON. vös, moisture; vos-klædi, rain-proof clothes; vasla, to splash through the marshes (kvaske). E. ooze, the wet mud left by the tide. Fr. vase, owse, mud, soft dirt in the bottom of waters.—Cot. N. vaasa, to work in the wet and exposure, especially out at sea. Da. dial. qvas, mud, puddle. Veien staaer i eet qvas, the way is all in a puddle. Quasse, to plash, representing the sound of mud or water under-foot. Det quasser i stövler, of the sound of water in the shoes. Qvaske, to plash, tramp through wet. N. vaspa, vassa, to wade, go in the wet; vass blom, water-lily; vass drukk-jen, water-logged; vassen, watery. EFris. osen, to dabble in wet.

Op-. See Ob-.

Opal. A gem 'of divers colours, wherein appeareth the fiery brightness of the carbuncle, the shining purple of the amethyst, the green lustre of the emerald, and all intershining.'—Fl. Known to the Romans under the name of opalus, showing that a Slavonic language was then spoken in Bohemia, whence the gem is still brought. The origin is Pol. palac, to glow, to blaze, opalać, to burn on all sides; Serv. opaliti, to shoot, to give fire; from the gleams of iridescent reflection by which the stone is distinguished.

Opaque. Lat. opacus, shadowy, dusky, Fr. opaque.

Open. G. offen, ON. opinn, AS. yppe, open ; yppan, G. öffnen, ON. opna, to open, to do up. ON. luka, to shut ; uppliuka, to open ; upplokinn, open. Opinn is not only open, but mouth up-wards, som ligger opad. We open a vessel by lifting up the cover.

Opera. A name introduced with the thing itself from Italy. Opera, any work, labour, action ; now-a-days taken for a comedy or tragedy sung to music.—Fl. Lat. opus, pl. opera, work.

Operate. Lat. operari, to work, opus, -eris, work. Bret. ober, to do, to make.

Ophthalmia. Gr. ὀφθαλμός, an eye.

Opinion. Lat. opinio ; opinari, to think, believe.

Opportune.—Importunate. Lat. op-portunus, serviceable, convenient, season-able, as a haven at hand to a ship ; from ob, in front, and portus. In order to ex-press the opposite ideas the ob of oppor-tunus was changed to the negative particle in, thus giving rise to importunus, incon-venient, troublesome, out of season.

-opt-.—Optative.—Option. Lat. op-tare, to wish, to chuse ; optio, a choice or election. Hence adopt, to chuse for one's own.

Optic.—Optician. Gr. ὀπτικός, having to do with vision, from the obsolete ὄπτο-μαι, to see.

Opulent. Lat. opulentus, from opes, wealth, abundance.

Or. Contracted from AS. âhwæther, âwther, âther, OE. outher. Goth. aith-than, OHG. edo, ON. eda, AS. eththa, Du. edder, eer, OHG. odo, AS. oththe, OHG. odar, Fris. auder, uder, Du. odder, oer, OSax. eftha, OFris. efther, OHG. alda, Swiss aid, ON. ella, Swiss alder, Sw. Dan. eller, or.—Dief.

Oracle.—Oral.—Orator. -ore. From Lat. os oris, the mouth, are Fr., E. oral, given by word of mouth ; Lat. oro, -as, to pray, to address words, whence oracu-lum, an oracle or declaration of the gods when consulted on human affairs ; oratio, words, speaking, speech; adoro, to pray to, to adore.

Orange. It. arancio, Venet. naranza, Sp. naranja, Mod.Gr. νεράντζιον. The name must have been introduced with the fruit itself from the East ; Pers. ná-renj, Arab. náranj. The loss of the n gave Mid.Lat. arangia, which passed into Fr. orange under the influence of the golden colour of the fruit.—Diez.

Orb.—Orbicular.—Orbit. Lat. orbis, a circular object, whence orbita, the track of a chariot-wheel ; orbita solis, the way of the sun.

Orchard. Goth. aurtigards, ON. jurta-garðr, MHG. wurzgarte, AS. wyrtgeard, ortgeard, a yard or enclosure for worts, i. e. vegetables, a garden. See Wort.

Orchestra. Gr. ὀρχήστρα, the part of the stage on which the chorus danced, from ὀρχέομαι, to dance.

Ordeal. AS. ordæl, Du. oordeel, ordael, a mode of judgment by fire or water, sup-posed to be decided by the hand of God ; the judgment κατ' ἐξοχήν. Du. oordeel, G. urtheil, judgment, from ON. úr, out of, and theil, part ; a laying out of parts, dis-posing of the matter in proper order. In the same way Lat. discrimen, a parting, separation, signifies an examination, de-cision, proof.

Order.—Ordain.—Ordinary. Fr. or-dre, It. ordine, Lat. ordo, -inis, a rank or row, arrangement, order. Hence ordino, to set in rows, to arrange, to ordain or settle the order of things by a decree. Ordinary, according to order, regular. An ordinary or public dinner at cer-tain hours may be explained as an open-ing to the public of the ordinary fare of the house. Common dyet in a mannes house : ordinaire.—Palsgr.

Ordnance. Formerly ordinance or ordonance, all sorts of artillery of great guns.—B. An incidental application of ordinance in the sense of arrangement, preparation. Fr. ordonner, to ordain, appoint, dispose, array, equip.—Cot. Furthermore the king and his council ordeyned blank chartres :—had them prepared.—English Chron. p. 13. Cam. Soc. In the same work we see the passage to the modern sense. The ordenaunce of the kinges guns avayled not, for that day was so grate rayne that the gonnes lay depe in the water, and so were queynt and myght not be schott.—p. 97. The Duke of Burgoyn had layd there all his apparament to take Caleys, amongis which was a horrible ordinauns, smale barelis filt full of serpentis and venymous bastes, which he thouhte to throwe into Caleys be engynas.—Capgrave Chron. p. 298. It. ordigno, a machine, mechanical con-trivance, applied by Ariosto to a gun.

Ordure. Fr. ordure, It. ordura, lor-dura, filth ; lordo, ordo, OFr. ord, filthy, dirty, from Lat. luridus, dark-coloured. In luridi dentes, discoloured teeth, the sense comes very near that of dirty, filthy. Mid.Lat. luridus, zwart, bleec, onreyn ; fuul.—Dief. Sup. The equivalence of forms with an initial l or n and a simple vowel is not uncommon. Fr. loutre, E.

Fr. lierre, OFr. hierre, ivy; Fr. lingot, E. ingot; Fr. laiton, It. ottone, brass; It. lonza, Sp. onza, an ounce; It. luscignolo, uscignolo, a nightingale. The derivation from horridus supported by Diez is unsatisfactory.

Ore. Properly the vein of metal, from the ore being found in a thin band appearing in the section like a vein running through the rock. Calamina est quædam vena terræ, is a certain ore.— Roger Bacon, Opus minus, 385. G. åder, Sw. åder, år, N. aader, aar, Dan. aare, a vein. Vena, åder, ådir.—Dief. Supp. The ordinary explanation identifies the word with AS. ær, ær, ON. eir, Goth. aiz, Lat. æs, æris, brass.

Organ.—Organic. Gr. ὄργανον (from ἔργῳ, to work), Lat. organum, an instrument, tool, or machine, a musical instrument. Ultimately the great instrument of church music of pipes blown by a bellows. Organa dicuntur omnia instrumenta musicorum. Non solum illud organum dicitur quod grande est et inflatur follibus, sed quicquid aptatur ad cantilenam et corporeum est.—St Augustine in Duc.

Orgies. Gr. ὄργια, sacred rites; originally those in honour of Bacchus.

Oriel. This word formerly signified a chamber or apartment. Adjacet atrium nobilissimum in introitu quod porticus vel oriolum appellatur.—Ut non in infirmaria, sed seorsim in oriolo monachi infirmi carnem comederent. — Matth. Paris in Duc. Oriolum, a little entrance, from os, oris? It is glossed chamber in Bibelsworth.—Nat. Antiq. p. 166. Plus est delit en le oriol [chamber] Escoter la note de l'oriol [wodewale]. For the queen's closet in a chapel:— Ye schall hur brynge to the chapelle, Be the oryall syde stande thou stylle. Erl of Tholouse, 1. 308. That lady herde his mournyng all Ryght under the chambre wall In her oryall there she was.— Then said that lady mylde of mood, Ryght in her closet there she stood. Squire of low Degree, 1. 180. An oriel window is one that juts out so as to make a small apartment in a hall.

Orifice. Lat. orificium, what makes an opening; as, oris, mouth.

Origin. Lat. origo, -inis; orior, to arise, take a beginning.

Orison. Fr. oraison, Lat. oratio, a prayer.

Orlope. The uppermost deck in a great ship, from the mainmast to the mizzen.—B. It. tetto, the deck or overloope. G. Überlauf, the deck of a ship, from überlaufen, to run over the whole surface. Du. overloop, a covering, the deck of a ship.—Kil.

-orn-. Ornament. Lat. ornare, to adorn, equip.

Ornithology. Gr. ὄρνις, ὄρνιθος, a bird.

Orphan. Gr. ὀρφανός, having lost father or mother.

Orpiment. A yellow arsenical colour, Lat. auripigmentum.

Ortho-. Gr. ὀρθός, upright, right, true. As in Orthodox (δόξα, opinion, way of thinking or teaching). Orthography, &c.

Orts. Orts, or in Scotland worts, are the fragments and rejected parts that are left by an animal in feeding, and generally the odds and ends that fall to the ground in doing any work. A cow is said to ort her provender when she tosses it aside; a child orts his bread when he crumbles it down; hence metaphorically to ort, to reject.—Jam. The word is very widely spread. Da. dial. ovred, erred, orret, ort, orts; Du. oor-aete, oorete, reliquiæ fastidii pabuli; ooraetigh, fastidiens nimis saturitate — Kil.; NFris. erten, to leave remnants in eating; Pl.D. ert, ortels, orts.; erten, verorten, orden, to be nice in eating, to pick out the best and leave much remnants — Brem. Wtb.; Westerwald urzen, Swiss hurschen, urschi, orts; urschen, to ort; Bav. urâssen, urezen mit etwas, to deal wastefully; die Urâss, rejection, orts. The Du. and Bav. forms naturally lead to the derivation suggested by Kiliaan, ooraete, quasi oueraete, esca superflua, what is left over in eating; and perhaps the form of the word has been modified in accordance with this notion, but Lap. arates, which is used in exactly the same sense, can hardly have had such an origin. The corresponding forms in the kindred dialects are Esthon. warrid (was herunterfällt), droppings, crumbs, from warrisema, to rustle, to fall out, as ripe oats; Fin. waret, chaff driven off in thrashing, from warista, to drip or fall gradually, as grain from the ears of corn, or leaves in the autumn. It is remarkable that an initial w is added in Sc. worts, as in Fin. waret, compared with Lap. arates. 'Eenings worts are gude mornings fodderings.'—Jam.

Oscillate. Lat. oscillum, something swung by a rope fastened to the top of a pole.

Osier. Fr. osier, a willow, willow twig, wicker basket. Probably from being used in making utensils of different kinds, for which wicker was much employed by the Gauls. Bret, aoza, oza, to form, fashion, arrange ; aozil, ozil, willow, made of willow.
Osprey. Lat. ossifraga, a bone-breaker.
To Oss. To offer to do, to aim at, to intend to do.—B. Fr. oser, to dare, ad-venture, be so bold as to do a thing ; Prov. ausar, It. ausare, osare, Venet. ossare, from Lat. audere, ausum, to dare.
The difficulty in this derivation is that oss belongs so completely to the popular part of the language that it is very un-likely to have had a Fr. derivation. W. osio, to offer to do, is undoubtedly the same word, but we are unable to say whether it is borrowed from E. oss, or vice versâ. We find the idea in an earlier stage of development in Fin. osata, to aim right, to strike the mark, to be able to do, to know the way ; osaella, to try to do, to imitate. Esthon. ots, end, point ; otsima, to seek ; otsama, to end.
Osseous. Lat. osseus; os, ossis, a bone.
Ostensible.—Ostentation. Lat. os-tendo, ostensum (for ob-s-tendo, to stretch out opposite), to show ; whence the fre-quentative ostento, -as, to make a show.
Ostler. Properly the master of an inn, but now appropriated to the servant at an inn who has charge of the stables and horses. Fr. hostelier, a host, innkeeper, from hostel, a house, hostel, hall, palace.—Cot. The application to the sense of a groom seems to have taken place at a very early period in England. In the reign of Rich. II., W. Brewer, 'hostil-larius W. Larke pistoris,' was condemned to the hurdle for making short weight in horsebread, having to stand 'uno de dictis panibus circa collum suum, et uno botello feni ad dorsum suum in signum hostil-larii pendentibus,' with a bottle of hay at his back as a sign of an hostler.—Lib. Alb. 2. 425. Jack 'the hosteler of the house,' the companion of the tapster and her paramour, in Chaucer's story of the Pardoner and the Tapster, is plainly the ostler in the modern sense, and not the master of the inn.
Ostrich. Fr. austruche, an austridge or ostridge—Cot. ; Sp. avestruz, from avis struthio; Lat struthio, Mid.Lat. strucio, an ostrich.—Diez.
Other. Goth, anthar, OFris. ander, other, or, ON. annar, Sanscr. anya, an-tara, other ; Lat. alius, other, alter (whence It. altro, Fr. autre), the other, one of the two ; Lith. antras, Lett. ohtrs, other, second.
Otter. It. lontra, Sp. lutria, nutria, Fr. loutre, Lat. lutra, G. otter, ON. otir, Pol. wydra, Russ. vuidra.
Ottoman. The Ottoman empire, the Turkish empire. From Othman the founder of the dynasty.
Ought. Anything. See Aught.
Ought. The pret. of the verb to owe.
Our. Goth., G. uns, (acc. pl) us ; un-sar, unser, AS. use, ure, our.
Ounce. Fr. once, Lat. uncia, the 12th part of a pound, and an inch, the 12th of a foot.
Ousel. OHG. amisala, G. amsel, AS. osle.
To Oust.—Out. Fr. oster, to remove, take away, lay aside, drive or expel from. Ostez vous de là, get you hence.—Cot.
Prov. ostar, to take away; forostar, to drive out. It is probable that this last is the original meaning of the word, and that oust and the preposition out, ON. ut, G. aus, have their origin in the cry huss ! hut ! used to drive out dogs. Swiss huss ! a cry to set on a dog or to hiss a man, an exclamation of contempt or abhor-rence ; huss usse ! fort, hinaus ! properly to a dog, then to a man. W. hwt! off, off with it, away ! and as a noun, a taking off, a taking away ; hwtio, to hiss out, to hoot; Gael. ut! ut! interj. of disappro-bation or dislike ; Patois de Champ. hus, hootings, cries, out (hors), door. ' Quibus id agentibus conversâ facie in sinistram partem indignando quodammodo, virtute quantâ potuit, Hutz ! Hutz ! quod signifi-cat Foras ! Foras ! Unde patet quia ma-lignum spiritum videt.'—Vita Ludovici Pii in Duc. Sw. hut! is used as a cry to drive out dogs or to stop them and make them quiet, get out, for shame ! huta ut, to drive out. In the same way Serv. osh ! cry to drive out ; oshkati, to cry osh ! to drive out.—The Lap. cry is has! as! agreeing remarkably with the Gael, form of the preposition, as, out, out of ; Lap. hasetet, to drive out. Fr. dial, oussi! toussi! cry to drive out a dog; usse! houste! houste à la paille ! ut! hors d'ici, va t'en.—Jaubert.
The cries addressed to animals being commonly taken from sounds made by themselves, the exclamation hoot! used in driving out dogs, may be compared with Lap. huttet, to bark. Swiss huss, hauss, a dog.
Outrage. It. oltraggio, Fr. oultrage, outrage, excess, unreasonableness, vio-lence, from Lat. ultra, Fr. outre, beyond, with the termination age. Elle est belle voirement, mais il n'y a rien d'oultrage, she is fair indeed, but no fairer than she should be. Je ne vous demande rien d'outrage, I demand nothing unreason-able.—Cot.

Oval.—Ovary. Gr. ὠόν, Lat. ovum, an egg; whence oval, eggshaped; ovary, the eggbearing organ.

Ovation. Lat. ovare, ovatum; said to be from oves, the sheep sacrificed in the ovation or lesser triumph.

Oven. G. ofen, Goth. auhns, OSw. ogn, omn, ON. ofn, Gr. ἰπνός, oven; Sanscr. agni, Lith. ugnis, Lat. ignis, fire.

Over. AS. ufan, above, upwards, from above, up; ufe-weard, ufan-weard, up-wards; ufera, higher, farther; ufemest, highest; upmost. G. auf, on, upon, up; oben, above, on high; ober, upper, over; über, over; Gr. ὑπό, under; ὑπέρ, over; Lat. sub, under; super, over.

Overt.—Overture. Fr. ouvrir, Prov. obrir, ubrir, OFr. aovrir, a-uvrir, adub-rir, Castrais durbi, dotirbi. Wall. drovi, to open, from Lat. deoperire, to uncover.—Diez.

Owche.—Nouche. Ouche (a jewel), bague.—Palsgr. The original form is that with an initial n. Whan thou hast taken any thynge, Of lovis gifte, or nouche or pin.—Gower in Hal. OHG. nusca, nuscja, nuskil, MHG. nusche, niischel. Mid. Lat. nusca, a buckle, clasp, brooch.

To Owe.—Ought.—Own. Goth. aigan, aihan, to possess, to have; aihts, posses-sions; AS. (agan), pres. áh, ágon, prt. áhte; ON. eiga, á, eigum, átte, to possess; G. eigen, AS. ágen, Sc. awin, what is pos-sessed by one, own. To own a thing is to claim it as possessed by oneself. To owe money is an elliptical expression for having it to pay to another, possessing it for another. ON. Eg á hestinn, that is my horse; eg á lánga leið, I have a long way to perform; eg á at giallda, I have to pay, I owe; Guð á hlýðni at þér, you owe obedience to God, God possesses, is rightfully entitled to, obedience at your hands. In the same way we say, I have to pay you money, I have to go to Lon-don, Je dois aller à Londres. 'The plow-man sayde, Gyve me my moneye. The preeste sayde, I owe none to thee to paye:' i. e. I have none to pay thee, or I owe thee none.—From Wynkyn de Worde in Reliquiæ Ant. p. 46. A Yorkshireman says, Who owes this? who is the possess-or of this, to whom does it belong?

Owl. ON. ugla. Da. ugle, AS. eowle, OHG. iuwila, MHG. iule, G. eule. Doubt-less from its cry. G. uhu, the screech owl. Lat. ulula, owl; ululo, to howl.

Ox. A name extending to the Finnic branch of languages; Lap. wuoksa, Syrianian os, Votiak oj (Fr. j), Ostiak uges, Turk. ogys.

Oyster. OFr. oistre, Lat. ostrea, Gr. ὄστρεον, ON. ostra, AS. ostre.

Pace. Fr. pas, It. passo, Lat. passus.

Pacify. Lat. pacificare; pax, pacis, peace.

Pack.—Packet. G., Du. pack, a bundle. Fr. paquet, a small bundle. A pack of cards, and figuratively, a pack of hounds; G. diebenpack, a gang of thieves; das pack, lumpenpack, the dregs of the people, a pack of rogues;—Kütrn. A naughty pack was formerly used as a term of abuse for a loose woman, as a person is now sometimes called 'a bad lot.'

To pack, to make into a bundle; G. sich packen, Sw. packa sig bort, to be gone, be packing, pack away. A jury is packed when it is selected and put to-gether for a particular purpose, and so in G. die karten packen, to pack cards in a fraudulent manner, so that one may know how they lie.

The original meaning is shown in Es-thon. pakima. Fin. pakkata, to stuff, to cram; pakko, compulsion, force, neces-sity, pain; Lat. pangere, pactum, to drive in, to fasten; Gr. πηγνύω (root παγ), to stick or fix in as a nail, to fasten together, put together, to make solid, stiff, or hard; πηγός, firm, solid.

Pact. Lat. paciscor, pactus sum, to agree upon, to engage for, from pango, pactum, to drive in, fix, make firm; pan-gere inducias, societatem, pacem. See Pack.

* Pad. I. In the most general sense, a separate mass, a pack, bundle, bunch. A pad of yarn, a certain quantity of skeins made up in a bundle; a pad of wool, a small pack such as clothiers carry to a spinning house.—Devon. Gl. in Hal.

He was kept in the bands, having under him but only a pad [bundle] of straw.—Fox, Martyrs.

Glad here to kennel in a pad of straw.—Drayton.
A pad is then a bunch of some sort of stuffing confined in a case, a small cushion, quilted saddle or the like.
The word is probably an equivalent of Bav. batzen, botzen, a lump of soft mate-rial, and is connected with the notion of paddling in something soft and wet in the same way that dab, a lump of something soft, is connected with dabble. G. patsch! (Sanders), Swab. batsch ! interjection ex-pressing the sound of a sudden fall or blow ; batschen, to paddle in water, tramp in soft mud. Swiss bâtscheu, to fall to-gether, to clot. Die matrazze bâtscht sich, the matrass becomes lumpy. Comp. the proverbial expression a pad in the straw, something wrong, a screw loose. ' Here lyes indede the padde within the straw.'—Hal. Swiss bâtsch, a lump, clump ; bâtsch haar, a bunch of clotted hair ; bâtsch, a pad of clouts sewed one upon the other ; bâtschet, what lies one upon the other, be-comes a lump, is padded out. G. patz lehm, a lump of clay to stop a hole in a furnace.
The same train of thought gives rise to the parallel series, G. watsch ! represent-ing the sound made by a blow with some-thing soft, a fall in the mud, &c. ; E. wad, a lump or piece of something soft ; wad-ding, padding or stuffing out.
In the sense of a cushion there is a re-markable coincidence with Fin. padja, a pad of hay to prevent galling by the saddle or horse collar, a mattress ; Esthon. paddi, a pillow, cushion.
2. Pad, a path ; to pad, to pace, go on foot.—Hal. Pad, in cant, the highway ; padder, footpad, one who robs on foot. Pad (in sporting language), the foot of a hare or fox. Pl.D. pad, the sole of the foot ; pad-weg, G. pfad. Fin. padet, patet, a foot-path ; Pl.D. pedden, to tread ; pad-jen, to trip. Door dik un dunn padjen, to tramp through thick and thin. Gr. πατέω, to tread ; πάτος, a path ; Sp. patear, to kick, to stamp ; pata, foot and leg of beasts ; Fr. patte, paw. See To Paddle.
To Paddle. To move in the water with the hands or feet.—B. Fr. patouiller, to paddle or dabble in with the feet, to stir up and down and trouble.—Cot. Hence paddle, an implement for paddling, an oar with a broad flat blade, as Fr. gasche, an oar or skull, from gascher, to splash. The idea of splashing or pad-dling in the wet frequently occurs in the special form of tramping through the mud, explaining the root pad or pat in the formation of words signifying tramp, tread, the way trodden, or the foot as the implement of tramping. G. patsch ! like klatsch ! quatsch ! watsch ! represents the sound made by a blow with something soft and flat. Patsch ! da lag es. Patsch ! da hatte er eins auf's maul. Bav. patsch-en, to tramp ; patschen, the foot or shoe ; lackenpatscher, a step i' the gutter. Pl.D. patsch, mud ; patsch, patsch-hand, the hand in speaking to a child, from the sound of a pat with the soft flat hand of a child. Bav. pfotschen (contemptuously), paw, hand ; G. pfote, Fr. patte, paw ; Gr. πούς, Lat. ped', foot.
In the same way with an initial pl in-stead of p, Pl.D. pladern, to paddle ; E. plod, to move with heavy footfall ; Swab. pfatschen, pflatschen, pfatscheln, pflat-scheln, to paddle ; pflaute, pflautsch, pflote, a coarse, thick hand.
* Paddock. 1. ON. padda, Du. padde, a toad.
Probably from the notion of paddling in water. G. patschen, to splash, paddle ; wasser-patsch, a frog. Dreck-patz (dirt paddler), a name given in the story to the frog king.
2. A small enclosed piece of pasture near home. Commonly regarded as a corruption of AS. pearroc, a park or en-closure, but this would be contrary to the usual course, as dd more readily changes to rr than the converse. Swab. pfatt, an enclosure.
It may signify merely a small patch or piece of land. See Pad.
* Padlock. A hanging lock ; from pad, in the sense of a lump or detached mass, as distinguished from the common lock let into the substance of the mem-ber which it fastens.
Pagan. Lat. paganus ; pagus, a coun-try village.
Page. 1. It. paggio, Fr. page, pro-perly a boy, then a serving boy, attendant. Chaucer, speaking of an infant, says, In cradle it lay and was a proper page. Gr. παῖς, παιδίον, child ; Gael. paisde, a young boy or girl ; Manx paitchey, a child.
2. Page of a book, from Lat. pagina, a sheet of paper, as Fr. lame, from lamina, a blade, femme, from fœmina. See Pageant.
Pageant. A triumphal chariot or arch, or other pompous device, usually carried about in public shows.—B. Pagent, pagina.—Pr. Pm. The authori-ties cited by Way in the notes on this passage show that the original meaning of the word was a scaffold for the purpose of scenic exhibition, equivalent to Lat. and It. pegma, which is explained by Florio, a frame, a fabric, a machine, or pageant, to move, to rise, or to go itself with wheels, with vices, or with other help. In a contemporary account of the performances, cited in Sharp's Coventry Mysteries, certain pageants are spoken of, 'which pagiants were a high scafold with two rowmes, a higher and a lower, on four wheeles.' The compiler of the Liber Albus, describing the ceremonial at the entry of Henry VI. into London, A.D. 1432, uses pagina and machina as synonymous. He tells us that at the entry of the bridge, 'parabatur machina satis pulcra in cujus medio gigas mirae magnitudinis.—Ex utroque latere ipsius gigantis in eadem pagina erigebantur duo animalia vocata antelops.'—Munim. Gildh. III. 459. The name was afterwards transferred to the subject of exhibition, whether a mere image or a dramatic performance. In the Chester Mysteries each drama is introduced in the form, 'Incipit pagina prima de celi, angelorum, &c., creacione.' The word was sometimes written pagyn, or pagen, truer than the modern form to the Lat. pagina, from whence it is derived. Nor is there reason to doubt that pagina itself is an equivalent of compago, -inis, or compages, from the verb pango, to fasten, signifying a framework of materials fastened together, just as the equivalent pegma is Gr. πήγμα, a construction, from πήγνυμι, to fasten. Ἀμαξαν πήξασθαι, to build a waggon. Lat. pagino, compagino, to construct. 'Solidoque navem paginatam robore.'—Paulin in Facc. Pagina, a sheet of paper, is supposed to be so called from the skins of papyrus compacted together of which it is composed.
Pagod. An image worshipped by the Indians and Chinese, or the temple belonging to such an idol.—B. From Ptg. pagao, a pagan, and thence pagode, an assembly of idolaters, temple of the Indians, porcelain image.
Pail. It. padella, Venet. paela, a pan; Sp. paila, a bason, a pan; Lat. patera, a bowl; patella, a dish, a plate; Fin. padda, Bret. pod, E. pot.
Pain. Fr. peine, pain, penalty, punishment, also pains, labour, endeavour, also pain, trouble, anguish.—Cot. Du. pijne, G. pein, pain, trouble, punishment; kopfpein, zahnpein, head-ache, tooth-ache. W. poen, Bret. poan, pain, punishment, pains; Gael. pian, pain, pang, torment; ON. pina, to torment, to punish.
PALE All from Lat. poena, retribution, punishment, a word which from the prominence of the idea in religious teaching would readily be carried into all European languages. See Punish.
Painim. A heathen, properly heathenism. Fr. paien, a pagan; paiennisme, paienisme, paienime, paganismus, heathendom, heathenland.
Paint. Lat. pingere, pictum, Fr. peindre, peint, to paint.
Pair.—Par. Lat. par, alike, even. Fr. pair.
Palace. Lat. palatium.
Paladin. It. paladino, palatine, belonging to an emperor's court or chief palace, a count palatine; also a paladin, a knight, or famous man-at-arms of an emperor's palace.—Fl. The knights of the round table were the paladins of Arthur or of Charlemagne, from whose exploits the heroic character implied in the name is derived.
Palaeo-. Palin-. Palim-. Palaeo- (in Geol.), Gr. παλαιός, ancient; πάλαι, long ago, of old. Palin-, Palim-, Gr. πάλιν, back, again. Palimpsest, a MS. written on a former MS. rubbed out. Gr. παλίμψηστος, from ψαίω, ψάω, to rub off. It is curious that a plausible explanation of both πάλιν and πάλαι may be found in the Finnish languages; of the first in Fin. palaan, pallata (to be compared with Gr. πολέω, to turn), to roll, to return; palatus, return. From the same root seems to spring Lap. pale, a turn, time; tann palen, at that time; tai palai (plur.), in those times, formerly. In Lat. olim (from olle for ille, in those times), the word signifying times is understood, while in Gr. πάλαι there would be an ellipse of the demonstrative.
Palanquin. Ptg. palanquim, a chair or couch carried between poles on men's shoulders, from Sp. palanca, a lever, a cowl-staff, or pole on which a weight is supported between two men.
Palate. Lat. palatum.
Palaver. Mid.Lat. parabola, Sp. palabra, Ptg. palavra, word, discourse. The word seems to have come to us from the intercourse with the negroes of the African coast, where Portuguese was the European language principally known. To hold a palaver was there used for a conference, and thence the word was introduced as a slang term. See Parley.
Pale.—Paling.—Palissade. Lat. palus. It. palo, a pole or stake; Sp. palo, a stick; G. pfahl, a pile, pole, stake; Fr. palis, a pale or thick lath, a stake, pole, pile.—Cot. w. palis, a thin partition of boards, wattle, lath.
In a secondary sense pale signifies an enclosure, a place paled in.
Pale, 2.—Pallid. Lat. palleo, to be pale.
Palette. The flat plate on which a painter rubs his colours. W. pal, a spade; Bret. pal, a spade, quoit, float of a mill; It. pala, any kind of flat and broad thing or plate, a spade, float of a water-wheel, blade of an oar, shoulder-blade; paletta, any little flat thing with a handle, a shovel, trowel, spattle, slice, racket. Fr. pale, a shovel; palet, a quoit; palette, a. sur- geon's slice.
Palfrey. Fr. palefroi, It. palefreno, Mid.Lat. paraveredus, parafredus, pala- fridus, an easy-going horse for riding; veredus, a post-horse. The term is ex- plained by Duc. an extra post-horse, a horse used in the military and by-roads as veredus on the main roads, but it is probable that this distinction was not observed. 'De querela Hildebrandi co- mitis quod pagenses ejus paravreda dare recusant.'—Capit. Car. Mag. The first half of the word is supposed to be the Gr. παρα, by, a by-horse; but it is not easy to understand how such a compound could arise. From parafredus were formed G. pferd, Du. paard, a horse.
Pall. A cloth that covers a coffin at a funeral, a cloak. Lat. pallium was especially applied to the cloak sent by the Pope for the inauguration of a bishop. W. pall, a mantle, a pavilion; Bret. pall- en, a coverture; pallen-wêlé, bed-cover, coverlet; pallenvardh, horse-cloth, hous- ings; Gael. peall, a skin or hide, cover- ing, veil.
To Pall. To grow flat as liquors do, to make dull, to take off the appetite.—B. To pall, to rot.—Squire of Low Degree. W. pallu, to fail; pall, loss of energy, miss, failure. To appall is to cause to pall, to stupefy with horror or similar emotion.
* Pallet. Palyet, lytylle bed, lectica. --Pr. Pm.
And on a paillet all that glad night By Troilus he lay.—Chaucer.
Langued. pallet, a straw or rush mat. Prov. paillola, a couch. It. pagliaccio, a pallet or straw bed.—Fl. From Lat. palea, chaff; It. paglia, Fr. paille, straw, chaff.
Palletoque.—Pallecote. A cassock or short coat with sleeves.—B. Fr. pal- letoc, a garment like a short cloak with sleeves.—Cot. Bret. paltôk, a cloak of coarse cloth worn by peasants at their work. Gael. peall, a skin or hide, a bunch of matted hair, a mat, coverlet; peallaid, a sheepskin; peallach, shaggy, matted; pealtag, a patched cloak.
To Palliate. Lat. palliare, to cloke. See Pall.
Palm. 1. Gr. παλάμη, Lat. palma, W. palf, AS. folm, OHG. folma, the flat of the hand; Lat. palpare, ON. fálma, to grope, feel for with the hands; W. palfalu, to grope, creep on the hands and feet.
2. Lat. palma, the palm, a tree with broad spreading leaves like the palm of one's hand. Hence palmer, a pilgrim, carrying a palm-branch in sign of having been to the Holy Land.
3. The yellow catkin of the willow, the branches of which, on account of the name, are carried on Easter Sunday to represent the palm-branches of Judea. Pl.D. palme, bud, catkin of willow, hazel, alder, &c. The buds or eyes of the vine are also called palmen in Germany, whence may be explained E. palmer- worm, a grub or worm destroying the buds of plants.
The name seems to have been given to a catkin, from the woolly or feathery tex- ture. Palm of wull or loke.—Pr. Pm. Fin. palmu, catkin of willow; palmikko, lock of hair; palmikoita, to plait hair or wicker.
Palpable. Lat. palpor, to stroke gently, to feel with the hand.
Palpitate. Lat. palpito, to pant or beat.
Palsy. A loss of the bodily powers, corrupted from Fr. paralysie, Lat. para- lysis.
There our Lord heled a man of the palasye. Sir John Mandeville, p. 107.
See Paralyse.
To Palter.—Paltry. To palter is properly to babble, chatter, then to trifle. Paltry, trifling.
One whyle his tonge it ran and paltered of a cat, Another whyle he stammered styll upon a rat. Gammer Gurton, ii. 3.
In like manner we find babbling for tri- fling.
K. John. Why dost thou call them bablyng matters, tell me? Sedition. For they are not worth the shaking of a pear-tree.—King Johann, Cam. Misc.
Sp. chisme, tattle, tale, thence lumber of little value.
Depreciatory terms for the exercise of the voice are commonly taken from the continuous sound of water or the like. Pl.D. pladdern, to paddle, dabble; Du. pladeren, G. plaudern, to tattle, or talk in excess; N. puttra, to simmer, bubble, whisper, mutter; Pl.D. paotern (pron. pawtern), to patter, repeat in a monotonous manner. From the broad sound of the a in this pronunciation is introduced the l of palter, in the same way as was formerly seen in the case of falter, halt. Patter and palter are related together, as E. chatter and It. cialtrare, to prattle, chat. From the notion of what is trifling, worthless, seems to be developed N. paltia, rags.

Pam. The knave of Clubs. Pol. Pamfil, the knave of any suit. The Swedes call the knave of Spades äkta Pampen, the true Pam; the knave of Clubs the false Pam. Bav. Pampfili, the queen of Spades (der Eichel-Ober); pampfili, Sp. patifilo, a greedy, lazy person. See Pamper.

To Pamper. To feed high, to indulge. —B. Bav. pampfen, to stuff; sich voll pampfen, to stuff oneself full, especially of puddings; pampf, thick gruel. Pampf is a nasalised form of the nursery pap, food. Tyrol, pappele, milk porridge; pappelen, to feed with dainties, to pamper. Thus the devil fareth with men and wommen. First he stirith hem to pappe and pampe her fleisch desyrynge delicious metis and drynkis. —OE. prayers in Reliq. Ant. i. 41.

On the other hand Fl. has pambére (quasi pane e bére), bread and drink, also a nunchion of an afternoon; pamberáto, pampered, full-fed.

Pamphlet. From Sp. papeleta, a written slip of paper, a written newsletter, by the insertion of the nasal, as in Du. pampier, paper. Sp. papelon, a large piece of paper, a pamphlet. Gloster offers to put up a bill: Winchester snatches it, tears it. Winch. Com'st thou with deep premeditated lines, With written pamphlets studiously devised? H. VI.

Pan-. Gr. πᾶν, everything. As in Panegyric (πανήγυρις, a general assembly), Panorama (ὁράω, to see, ὅραμα, a sight seen).

Pan. ON. panna, Du. panne, G. pfanne, Boh. pánew, Lith. pana. From Lat. patina?

Pander. From Pandarus, the uncle of Troilus, who performs the part of a pander in the story of Troilus and Cressida, popular in the middle ages.

Pane. i. The derivation from Lat. pagina, a leaf, page, any flat expanse, as a sheet of marble, or piece of land, seems PANNEL supported by the form paine, a piece of wall.—Roquef. Valvarum paginæ, the panels of doors.—Pallad. Pane or part of a thing, pagina. Pannel, pagella, panellus.—Pr. Pm. The preponderating evidence however is in favour of the derivation from Lat. pannus, cloth, through Fr. pan, a pane, piece or pannel of a wall, of wainscot, of a glass window, &c., the skirt of a gown, the pane of a hose or cloak.—Cot. The pane of a hose was a sheet of different colour or material let into the garment. Than the knyght shewed me a pane of the wall, and said, Sir, see you yonder part of the wall which is newer than all the remnant.—Berners, Froissart in R. Cat. pany, a piece of wall, pannel of wainscot, lap of a shirt; — de oro, gold leaf. Panyo, cloth. Prov. pan, rag, clout, lap, piece; Ptg. páno, pánno, piece of cloth; — de muro, piece of wall; — de chaminé, mantel-piece of a chimney.

Pang. AS. pyngan, Lat. pungere, to prick. Poignant or pricking grief is that which gives a severe pang. Fr. point, a stitch, or sharp pain in the side.

Panic. Gr. πανικός, from Πάν, the deity to whose influence panic fear was attributed.

Panicle. Lat. panicula, the woof round the quill, in the shuttle, the down upon reeds.

Pannage. The feeding of swine upon mast in the woods, or the duty accruing from it. Mid.Lat. pastio, pastionaticum, pasnaticum, pasnagium, pannagium, from Lat. pascere, pastum, to feed. ' In omnibus etiam suis nemoribus ipsorum porcis recursum, et omnimodos fructus ad eorum pabulum, absque eo pretio quod vulgo pasnaticum dicitur.'—A.D. 1130 in Duc. ' Plains pennaiges de chevaux, de jumens, poutrains, vaches, veaux et pourceaux allans à la dite forest de Cressi.'—A. D. 1478. Fr. pasnage, pawnage, mastage, the money received by the lord of a forest for the feeding of swine with the mast, or of cattle with the herbage thereof.—Cot.

Pannel. Fr. paneau or panneau (from pan), like Prov. pannet (petit pan—Rayn.), is a dim. of pan, pane. The Fr. term like the E. is applied to the flat pieces of board enclosed in the framework of a door, &c., the rug or thick cloth put under the load of a pack-horse. Du. panneel, rug-decksel, dorsuale, et sella aurigæ.—Kil. The pannel of a jury is the slip of parchment on which the names of the jurors are written. See Pane.
Pannier. Fr. panier, a basket, properly, as Milan, panéra, a bread-basket, from Lat. panis, bread. It. panára, panáris, any place to keep bread in, a pantry, a bread-basket.
To Panse. Fr. penser, to think, examine, consider of, also, as panser, to tend, look unto, have a care of, also to dress, physic, apply medicines unto.—Cot. Panser un cheval, to dress a horse.
Pansy. The flower heartsease, in Fr. called pensée, thought.
To Pant. Fr. panteler, to pant or throb, to beat, also to breathe short and thick, or often together ; pantiser, pantoiser, to breathe often, to be short-winded.—Cot. The quick beating of the heart is represented by the syllables pit-a-pat or the nasalised pintledy-pantledy, originally imitating the sound of a succession of light blows. 'And the rattling pit-pat noise.'—B. Jonson in R. 'My heart went pintledy-pantledy.'—Skinner. Then from the sympathy between the action of the heart and lungs, to pant, to breathe quick and hard.
Pantaloon.— Pantaloons. Fr. pantalon, a pair of trousers, seems a modern word. It. pantalone is the pantaloon of Italian comedy, a covetous and amorous old dotard who is made the butt of the piece. The word seems to signify a slovenly-dressed person, from Sp. pañal, clout, skirt or tail of shirt ; pañalon, a slovenly fellow whose shirt hangs out of his breeches.—Baretti. Lat. pannus, rag, cloth.
Pantomime. Gr. παντόμιμος ; one who acts in dumbshow ; παντο-, all, and μιμέομαι, to imitate. See Mimic.
Pantry.— Pantler. Fr. paneterie, place where the bread is kept ; whence pantler, the officer who had charge of that department, as butler, the officer who had charge of the buttery.
Pap.— Papa. Words formed of the simplest articulations, ma and pa, are used to designate the objects in which the infant takes the earliest interest, the mother and father, the mother's breast, the act of sucking or taking food. Papa and mamma are widely used in the sense of father and mother. Lith. pápas, Lat. papilla, It. poppa, E. pap, the nipple or breast ; It. poppare, to suck ; pappa, soft food prepared for infants ; pappare, to suck, to feed with pap ; Sp. papar, to eat; Magy. papa, in nursery language, eating; mama, drinking ; Walach. papá, to eat; Russ. papa, bread ; Lat. mamma, mammilla. Fin. mamma, the breast.
Papacy.— Papist. See Pope.
Paper. Lat. papyrus, Gr. Πάπυρος, the Egyptian rush of which paper was made. The occurrence of forms like W. pabyr, rushes, rush candles, Walach. papură, rush, is opposed to the common belief that the name is originally Egyptian.
Papillary. Lat. papilla, dim. from papula, a pimple.
Para-. Gr. παρά, beside, beyond.
Parable.— Parabola. Gr. παραβολή, a comparison, illustration, from παρα-βάλλω, to set side by side.
Paraclete. Gr. παράκλητος, from παρα-καλέω, to exhort ; in New Test. Gr., to comfort.
Parade. Great show, state ; the place where troops assemble for inspection. Fr. parer, to dress, adorn, hang richly, as with arras.—Cot. It. parare, to prepare, make ready, for a priest to put on his vestment before he goes to celebrate ; parata, any preparation, trimming, setting forth.—Fl.
Paradise. Gr. παράδεισος, from a Persian word signifying a park or hunting enclosure.
Paradox. Gr. δόξα, expectation, opinion, παράδοξος, contrary to opinion, strange.
Paraffine. A material having little affinity with other substances. Lat. parum affinis, little allied.
Paragon. Fr. paragon, a pattern or touchstone, whereby the goodness of things is tried ; the perfection or flower of, a paragon or peerless one.—Cot. Sp. paragon, model, example, from the compound preposition para con, in comparison with.—Diez. Para con migo, in comparison with me ; para con el, according to him.
To Paralyse.— Paralytic. Gr. λύω, to dissolve, loosen ; παραλύω, to loosen or disable at the side, to paralyse ; παράλυσις, paralysis, palsy ; παραλυτικός, one so affected.
Paramount. Above all, sovereign, or absolute.—B. Fr. paramont, at the top, up. ' Car meus est dit soit a toi, vien ça paramont, melius est enim ut dicatur tibi, ascende huc.—Proverbs xxv. 7.
Paramour. A love companion ; Fr. par amour, by way of love. Paramour (a woman), dame peramour.—Palsgr.
Parapet. It. parapetto, a ward-breast, breastplate, wall breast high, from parare, Fr. parer, to cover, or shield from, to ward or defend a blow—Fl., and It. petto, Lat. pectus, breast.

Paraphernalia, Gr. φερνή (φέρω), the dowry brought by the wife, gain, booty ; παραφέρνα, Lat. paraphernalia, goods be-longing to the bride (παρά) besides the stipulated portion.
Parasite. Gr. σίτος, wheaten bread, food ; παράσιτος, beside the food, eating at the table of another, a flatterer.
Parasol. It. parasole, a sun-shade, from parare, to ward off, and sole, the sun.
To Parboil. Lang. perbouli, to give a slight boil, to part-boil. Mod.Gr. μεσο-βράζω, to parboil ; μεσοβρέχω, to half wet, to wet in part.
Parcel. It. particella, any little parti-cle, parcel, part, portion. Fl. Fr. par-celle, a piece, little part. Cot.
Parcener. See Partner.
To Parch. Bav. pfarzen, to fry ; fär-zen, to toast bread. Probably direct from the crackling sound of things frying. Walach. parjoli (Fr. j), to burn, to singe.
Parchment. Fr. parchemin, G. per-gament, Lat. pergamena, from Pergamus in Asia Minor, where it was invented.
Pardon. Fr. pardon. It. perdono, the exact equivalent of E. forgive.
-pare. -pair. Lat. parare, to pre-pare ; as in Prepare, Repair, &c.
To Pare. Fr. parer, to deck, trim, garnish, order decently. Cot. Le mare-chal pare le pied d'un cheval avec un boutoir ; parer les legumes d'un potager pour les mettre en vente. Dict. Lang. Parer, to peel an apple. Patois de Norm. The radical meaning is to set forth, to prepare.
Parent. Lat. pario, to beget.
Parenthesis. Gr. θέσις, a setting (τίθη-μι, to put) ; παρένθεσις, something put in by the side of.
Parget. The plaister of a wall. B. To parget, quasi paristare, parietes cæ-mento incrustare. Skinner. Pariette for walles, blanchissure. Palsgr. in Way. If ye have bestowed but a little sum in the glazing, paving, parieting of God's house. Bp Hall in R.
Parish. Fr. paroisse, Lat. parœcia, Gr. παροικία, an ecclesiastical district or neighbourhood ; πάροικος, dwelling beside another, from παρά, by, and οἶκος, house.
Park. Fr. parc, an enclosure, sheep-fold, fish-pond ; Dan. fisk-park, a fish-pond ; It. parco, AS. pearroc, ohg. pferrich, G. pferch, park, enclosure ; Bret. park, an enclosed field ; Lang. parghe, a fold for cattle ; parga, parghejha, to fold cattle on the ground.
Parley. Parliament. Parole. It. parlare, Fr. parler, to speak. Commonly derived from Lat. parabola, a comparison, likeness, allegory, passing into paraula, parola, a word ; whence parolare, parlare, to speak. Mid.Lat. parabolare was con-stantly used in this sense. ' Nostri seniores parabolaverunt simul et considera-verunt.' Cap. Car. Calv. ' Cœpit eum bis terque appellare ; sed ille nihil homini valuit parabolare, sed digito gulam ei monstrabat.' Duc.
It is however hard to understand how the word for speaking could have had so forced an origin, and perhaps it may be explained in closer analogy with other words of like signification. We have often had occasion to remark the fre-quency with which the sound of water, and of babbling, or much talking, are re-presented by the same or similar forms. Now brabble and brawl are used as well to signify the noise of broken water as of chiding and loud or noisy talking. Shake-speare makes Sir Hugh Evans use prabbles and prabbles in the sense of idle chatter. The insertion of a vowel be-tween the mute and liquid would give W. parabl, speech, utterance, discourse ; parablan, to talk continually, to chatter ; parablus, eloquent, fluent. If these spring from a native Gallic root it might naturally have been retained in the speech of the Romanised Gauls, and adopted in written Latin under the form of parabolare. On the other hand, the sense of speaking is one where it is very unlikely that the British language should have borrowed from the Latin, and it is hardly possible that parabolare could have been generally used in the sense of speaking at a period sufficiently early to give rise to the W. word, without leaving evidence of such a use in classical Latin.
A similar explanation may be given of Sp. palabra, Ptg. palavra (the origin of our vulgar palaver), word, from G. plappern, to babble, tattle ; Sc. blabber, blebber, to babble, speak indistinctly.
Parlour. Fr. parloir, the room in a nunnery where the nuns were allowed to speak to visitors through a grating.
Parody. Gr. ᾠδή, a song ; παρῳδία (παρά, beside), a song diverted to another subject, a burlesque, parody.
Paroxysm. Gr. ὀξύς, sharp ; ὀξύνω, to sharpen ; παροξύνω, to prick on, stir up, exasperate, to grow violent ; παροξυσμός, exasperation, the violent fit of a disease.
Parricide. Lat. parricida, for patricida, the slayer (cædo, to strike) of one's father.

Parrot.—Parakeet. Fr. perroquet is derived by Menage from Perrot, the dim. of Pierre, Peter, from the habit of giving men's names to animals with which we are specially familiar, as Magpie (for Margery-pie, Fr. Margot), Jackdaw, Jack-ass, Robin-redbreast, Cuddy (for Cuthbert) for the donkey and hedgesparrow. When parrot passed into E. it was not recognised as a proper name, and was again humanised by the addition of the familiar Poll; Poll-parrot.
Probably Menage was wrong in deriving perroquet from Perrot, though right in the general principle. Sp. Perico, the short for Peter, also, as well as the dim. periquito, signifies a parrot, and it is from this latter form that Fr. perroquet and E. parakeet have been derived.
To Parry. It. parare, Fr. parer, to ward off. The Lat. parare is known only in the sense of making ready, but if we examine the compounds we shall find that the radical meaning must be to push. Separare, to separate, is to push apart; reparare, to repair, to push a thing back to its original place; comparare, to bring things together, to place them side by side. To ward off a blow is to push it aside.
To Parse. To distinguish the parts of speech and grammatical relations in a sentence. From pars orationis.
Parsimony. Lat. parsimonia; probably from parcere, to spare.
Parsley. Fr. persil, Lat. petroselinum.
Parsnep. Lat. pastinaca, Du. pastinak, pasternak, Fr. pasquenade, pastenaille.—Sherwood. The latter half of the E. name is the nep of turnep, signifying a tap-root. See Turnep.
Parson. Mid.Lat. persona ecclesiæ, the person who represents the church in a parish.—Blackstone. Persona signified dignity or office. Laicus quidam magnæ personæ ad nos veniens dicebat.—A. D. 741. Proconsulares et alii personati viri. Viri nobiles et personati. Nul clerc s'il n'est Prelaz ou establis en personnage ou dignité, &c.—Stat. Phil. Pulch. A. D. 1294 in Duc.
Part. — Partial. — Participle. — Particle. Lat. pars, partis, part.
* Partisan. A halberd.—B. A partisan or javelin to skirmish with, partigiana.—Torriano. Fr. pertuisane, a partisan, or leading staff; pertuiser, to make holes.—Cot. Lat. pertundere, pertusum, to pierce.
Partlet. A woman's ruff, and hence a name for a hen, from the long feathers about her neck.
Partition.—Party. Lat. partior, Fr. partir, to devise, share; parti, the part one takes or the side one embraces.
Partner.—Parcener. Fr. parcener, Prov. partener, parsonner, to partake, take part with; Fr. parcener, parsonnier, a partaker, partner, coheir.—Cot.
Partridge. Fr. perdrix, Lat. perdix.
Parturient.—Parturition. Lat. pareo, partum, to bring forth; partus, birth; parturio, to be engaged in birth.
To Pash. To dash, to bruise. If I go to him with my armed fist I'll pash him o'er the face. Troilus and Cress. The poor men half dead were beaten down with clubs and their heads pashed in pieces.—North. Plut. in R. Formed on the same plan with dash, representing the noise of the blow. Swiss batschen, to strike the hand; batsch, a blow of the hand; bätschen, to give a smacking sound; to fall with a noise. Die thüre zubätschen, to bang to the door. Dan. baske, to slap, thwack;—med vingerne, to flap the wings. Comp. Swiss dätsch, a smart blow with the open hand; dätsch, a clear sound, or the blow which produces it.
To Pass. From Lat. passus is formed Walach. pașu, a step, and thence pașì, to step, to go; pașhescu înainte, I advance, go forwards. The E. pace, from the same root, is used both as a substantive and as a verb. So also the original meaning of go or gang is to step, and the generalisation from the idea of stepping to that of progress in general is so natural that there is no occasion to seek for any other derivation of It. passare, Fr. passer, to go on, go by, go through.
The difficulty is to account for the Du. passen, to accommodate, adjust, to fit, a sense which may also be traced in Fr. se passer, to accommodate oneself, to shift. Il se passe à peu de chose, he is contented, he maketh shift with a little. Se passer à une chose, to do without it. Il a des biens pour se passer, he hath goods enough to serve his turn. So in E. he is well to pass, or well to do. In a somewhat different sense Du. wel te pas zijn, to be well in health.
The point of agreement is to be found in the sense of happening. The events of the world are regarded as moving onwards to meet us, and they happen at the moment when they pass by us.

Hence the expression, it came to pass, it happened. Fr. se passer, to happen. Ce qui s'est passé avant nous, what happened before us.—Gattel. Du. op dit pas, hoc loco, hoc tempore; te pas, à propos, à point, à saison.—Halma. Recht te pas komen, opportune, commodè, suo tempore, tempestivè venire.—Kil. Fr. passable, suitable, not in excess.

Passion.—Passive.—Patient. Lat. potior, passus, to suffer, endure, be affected.

Paste.—Pasty. It. pasta, Fr. paste, pâte, paste, dough. Sp. plasta, paste, soft clay, anything soft; plaste, size, a fine paste made of glue and lime.—Neum. Diez inclines to the derivation from Lat. pastus, food, though with some hesitation, arising from the relation between Sp. plasta and Gr. πλάσμα, anything moulded. And here doubtless he touches on a truer scent. As long as bread is in a state of paste it is not food. The essential characteristic of paste is its sticky, plastic condition, like that of moist clay or mud. Now the idea of paddling or dabbling in the wet and mud is expressed by a variety of imitative forms beginning indifferently with a p or pl, from whence the designation of a plastic condition, or plastic material, would naturally follow. Swab. pfatsch, pflatsch, the sound of a blow in water; Dan. pladske, Sw. plaska, paska, G. platschen, patschen, to plash, dabble; Dan. pladdre, E. paddle, Fr. patouiller, patrouiller, platrouiller (Pat. de Champ.), to dabble. I paddyl in the myre as duckes do or yonge chyldren; je pastille.—Palsgr.

In a sense somewhat further developed we have Gael. plasd, plaister, daub with lime or clay; Gr. πλάσσω, originally, to mould in clay; πλαστικός, of a pasty or clayey texture; Du. peisteren and pleisteren, to plaister; Cat. empastre, Sp. emplastre, a plaister; Cat. empastissar, Sp. emplastecer (in a confined sense), to daub, plaister; OFr. empaistros, muddy, sticky; Lang. pastissa, to handle awkwardly, as we speak of dabbling in a business of which we know but little.

Pastern. The part of a horse's foot from the fetlock to the heel, also a shackle for a horse.—B. Mid.Lat. pastorium was a shackle with which horses were tethered out at pasture, and hence the joint on which the shackle was fastened.—Muratori, Diss. 33. The pastern is in E. sometimes called the shackle-joint. Mid.Lat. pasturale, Fr. pastureau, pasturon, paturon, pastern. It. pastora, pastoia, the pasterns of a horse, also fetters, clogs, or stocks; pastoiare, to pastern, fetter, clog, shackle, or gyve the feet.—Fl.

Pastoral.—Pasture. Lat. pasco, pastum, to feed flock or herd; whence pastor, a shepherd. w. pasg, a feeding, fattening.

Pat. 1. A light blow, a tap or rap. An imitation of the sound. The frequentative patter represents the sound of a number of light blows given simultaneously or in succession.

2. A small lump, as a pat of butter; such a portion as is thrown down on a plate at once, from the sound of the fall. So G. klitsch, a tap, pat, or slap, a flap with the hand, or the noise which this blow causes; also a piece of a viscous, clammy body; ein klitsch butter, a piece of butter of undetermined size.—Kütn. So also to dab, to strike with something soft; a dab, so much of a soft body as is thrown down at once.

3. At the precise moment, in exact accordance with what is wanted. Fr. à propos, fitly, seasonably, to the purpose, or just pat.—Cot. Now I might do it pat, now he is praying.—Hamlet. The word here, as in the first sense, seems fundamentally to represent the sound of something thrown down upon the ground, as marking the exact moment of a thing being done, on the principle on which the sense of jump, exact, has been explained. To cut a thing smack off is a similar expression. Lith. pat, exactly, precise. Isz pat kėmo, out of the village itself (not the neighbourhood). Prësz pat wėja, due against the wind. Czè pat, in this very place.

Patch. 1. It. pezza, a clout, patch, tatter.—Fl. Swiss batsch, the sound of a blow, a smack; batschen, to strike the hand, to clap, thence batschen, patschen, to clap on a piece, to botch, to patch; batsch, a patch; batsch, a lump, a knot; silberbätsch, haarbätsch.

2. Patch is also a contemptuous term for a person; not specially for a fool, as explained by Nares. A crew of patches, base mechanicals. Mids. N. Dream. A cross-patch is still used by children for a cross person. It seems to signify an uncultivated person. Bav. patschen, to dabble, to blunder or fail. Patscherey, awkwardness. Der patsch, patscher, an awkward fellow; e guede patsche, as Fr. un bon homme, a simple fellow.

Pate. The radical meaning of the word seems to be the brain-pan, analogous to Sw. panna, the forehead. From the same root are Lat. patina, a dish or pan, It. padella, a pan, Fr. pate, a plate, or band of iron.—Cot. Parallel forms, with initial pl instead of p, are Piedm. plata (ludicrously), the bald head; G. platte, a plate of metal, flat surface, bald pate, shaven crown of a priest. Ir. plaitin, a little plate, skull; plaitin al chinn, the crown of the head.

Patent. Lat. pateo, to lie open. The King's letters patent are those addressed to all the world.

Paternal. Lat. paternus, from pater, father.

Path. Du. pad, G. pfad. See Pad, 2.

Pathetic.—Pathos. Gr. πάσχω, ἐπα-θον, to suffer; πάθος, suffering, passion.

Patient. See Passive.

Patriarch. Gr. πατρία, lineage, race; πατριάρχης, the chief or father of a race.

Patrician. Lat. patricius, originally a descendant of the patres, or senators, the fathers of the state.

Patrimony. Lat. patrimonium, a paternal estate.

Patriot. Gr. πατρία, lineage, descent, people; patria, country; πατριώτης, a fel-low-countryman.

Patrol. Fr. patrouille, formerly pa-touille, It. pattuglia, a night watch. The fundamental image is dabbling in the wet, tramping through the dirt. Fr. patrou-iller, to paddle or pudder in the water, to begrime, besmear—Cot. ; Sp. patullar (as G. patscheln), to dash through muddy places, run through thick and thin.—Neum. Rouchi patoquer, patrouquer, Champ. patoiller, platrouiller, to tramp through the mud. The G. cavalry con-temptuously call the foot-soldier lacken-patscher, puddle-stepper. Diez puts the cart before the horse, and derives the foregoing forms from Fr. patte, the foot.

Patron. Lat. patronus (augm. of pater, -tris), a protector.

Patten. Fr. patin, a patten or clog, also a skate. It. pattini, wooden pattens or chopinos.—Fl. Fin. patina, a shoe of birch bark. Du. plattijn, clog, wooden shoe.

One of the numerous series arising from the root pat, plat, representing the sound of the foot-fall. Sp. patear, to stamp, kick, foot, to strike with the foot. Probably Du. pattoffeln, pantoffeln, Fr. pantoufles, slippers, but formerly high-soled shoes, are from the same root. Rouchi patouf, gros lourdaut, one who goes stumping about.

To Patter. 1. To make a multiplicity of sounds, each of which would separately be represented by the syllables pat, tap. To patter as rain or hail, to fall with a rattling noise. Fr. patatra! interj. re-presenting the noise of something falling.

2. To repeat in a monotonous manner, like the pattering of a shower, and not from the repetition of paternosters. Sw. dial. paddra, to patter as hail, to crackle, chatter, prate; padra, a talking woman. Fr. pati-pata, Lang. patin-patourlo, words framed to represent talking with too great rapidity.—Dict. Lang. Pl.D. piterpater, unintelligible chatter, talk in a foreign language; paotern, to repeat in a mono-tonous manner, like a boy learning his lesson.—Danneil. N. putra, to mutter. Lett. putroht, to gabble; putroht pah-tarus, to gabble [paternosters] prayers.

Pattern. Fr. patron, patron, master of a ship or a workshop, hence a pattern, the inanimate master by which the work-man is guided in the construction of any-thing. Patrone, form to work by, exem-plar.—Pr. Pm. ' I drawe as a workeman dothe a patrone with his penne. Je pour-trais.'—Palsgr.

Paucity. Lat. paucus, few.

Paunch. It. pancia, Fr. panse, com-monly derived from Lat. pantex, Walach. pantece, the belly. But perhaps the word may be nearer a living origin. Tyrol. patschen, pantschen, to smack in eating, 'eat greedily ; pantsch, the belly.—Deutsch. Mundart. Bav. pamss, pawissn, belly, thick belly, short, fat child. See Punch.

Pause. The act of taking breath after labour affords the most natural image of repose, cessation. Thus we have Sw. pusta, to blow, to take breath; N. pusta, to rest awhile; G. bausen, pausen, pausten, to puff, to swell; Lat. pausare, to repose, pause, stop. Pausatum juvencum, a bullock that has rested. Gr. παύω, to bring to a stop, παύομαι, to cease, may in like manner be classed with Sc. pec'h, to pant, w. peuo, to pant, to puff, to pause, peues, a place of rest. Fin. puhhata, to breathe, to pant, to take breath, to rest.

To Pave. Lat. pavire, to strike, beat, make dense by beating; pavimentum, a path or floor made dense, in the first in-stance by beating, then by being laid with stones. Probably from the same root with path, with the common interchange of d and v. Pavyngestone or pathynge-stone, petalum.—Pr. Pm.

Pavilion. Fr. pavilion, Sp. pabellon, a tent, colours, flag; It. padiglione, a pavilion, canopy; Sard. papaglione, Prov. pabalho, Mid. Lat. papilio, a tent, apparently from the flapping of the canvas, like a butterfly. Cum essent cubicula aut tentoria, quos etiam papiliones vocant.—Augustine in Duc.
Paw. The foot of a beast. Bret. pav, poue, O.Fr. poue. 'En sa goule bouta sa poue.'—Fab. et Contes. 3. 55. W. palf, palm of the hand, paw; palf y llew, the lion's paw. See Palm.
Pawn. 1. ON. pantr, Du. pand, G. pfand, Fr. pan, a pledge. According to Diez it signifies something taken from the possessor against his will, from Prov. panar, to take away, rob, steal, withdraw from; Fr. paner, panner, to seize, distrain upon, rob; Sp. apanar, seize, carry away, filch; Ptg. apanhar, to seize, pluck, take possession, take by force or fraud, words admittedly connected with Lat. pannus, cloth. It seems to me that the train of thought runs in a somewhat different course. From Lat. pannus we have Prov. pan, skirt, cloth, rag, portion of cloth, portion; Fr. pan, skirt, face or extent of surface; Sp. paños, cloth, piece of cloth in a garment, paños, clothes; Pl.D. pand, skirt, portion of a garment; diekpand, portion of a dike which a man has to keep up; Du. pand, skirt of garment, a piece of property, a possession, a pledge. Dat huis is een waardig pand, that house is a valuable property. Now a pawn is a piece of property used for a specific purpose, viz. for enforcing payment of a debt or the like. In the rudest state of society clothes are almost the only property a man has, and are certainly the first matters that would be taken in pledge. Thus Pol. fani, a piece of cloth, is also a pawn or security; fantować się, to pawn clothes. From Fr. pan, Du. pand, a pawn, we pass to OFr. paner, pander, panir, pannéir (Roquef.), Du. panden, to seize as a pawn, to distrain. 'Saisir et panner sur les hommes de fief.'—Carp. 'De boeren worden stuk voor stuk gepand:' the property of the boors was seized piece by piece.—Halma.
2. A common man at chess. It. pedone, a foot-soldier, pedona, a pawn at chess; Sp. peone, a foot-soldier, day-labourer, pawn.
To Pay. 1. Mid. Lat. pacare, It. pagare, Fr. payer, to satisfy, to pay; Lat. pacare, to appease. Chaucer uses pay in the sense of satisfaction, gratification, But now to the Pardonere as he wolde sterte away, The hosteler met with him, but nothing to his pay.
Prol. Merch. Second Tale, 575.
2. To daub with pitch. Du. paaien, to careen a vessel.—Bomhoff. OFr. empoier, from Lat. poix, pitch. 'Et ne sont pas empoies, car ils n'ont pas de pois.'—Marco Polo, Pauthier's edition, p. 535. G. pech, pitch; pech-löffel, a paying ladle.
Pea. — Pease. Lat. pisum, W. pys, pease. Pea, in the singular, is a modern corruption on the supposition that the se of pease belonged to the plural form. The old pl. was peason.
Peace. Fr. paix, Lat. pax.
Peach. Fr. pêche, It. pesca, contr. from Lat. persica, the Persian fruit.
Peacock. Fr. paon, Lat. pavo, Gr. ταώς, from the cry of the bird.
Pea-jacket. Du. pije, pije-laecken, coarse, thick cloth; pije, a felt cloak, nautical cloak; pije-wanten, winter gloves.—Kil. Goth. paida, coat; gapaidon, to clothe; Ober D. pfait, coat, shirt; Fin. paita, shirt; Gael. plaide, blanket, plaid.
Peak. Sp. pica, Fr. pic, a sharp point. See Pick.
To Peak.—Peaking. Peaking, puling, sickly, from the pipy tone of voice of a sick person. It. pigolare, to peep as a chicken, to whine or pule; Russ. pikat', Esthon. pikama, piiksutama, to peep as a chicken; Sw. pjåka, pjämka, to pule; pjåkig, pjunkig, puling, delicate, sickly.
The same connection between the utterance of a thin high note and the idea of looking narrowly, which is noticed under Peep, is exemplified in the present word, which was formerly used in the sense of peeping.
That one eye winkes as though it were but blind. That other pries and seekes in every place.
Gascoigne in R.
Peal. A loud noise, as of bells or of thunder. N. bylia, to resound, to bellow; ON. bylr, a tempest; bjalla, a bell.
Pear. Fr. poire, It. pera, Lat. pirum.
Pearl. It. perla, OHG. berala, perala, Ptg. perola. Diez suggests a derivation from pirula, a dim. of pirus. It. pera, a pear, the name of perilla, being given in Sp. to a pear-shaped pearl. But it is not likely that the name would be taken from so exceptional a form. Wachter's explanation of the word as a dim. of G. beere, a berry, has this in its favour, that it was undoubtedly latinized by the term bacca, a berry. Baccas, gemmas rotundas, qui et uniones vocantur—quos et perulos vocant.—Gl. in Duc. Baccatus, mit laurbeer oder kostlichen stein geziert.—Dief. Sup. Peerle, bacca, bacca concheæ.—Kil. The evidence in favour of the derivation is thus very strong, otherwise a different origin might plausibly be suggested in the resemblance to a drop of dew, which is constantly turning up in poetry, and which gave rise to the legend that the pearl is a drop of congealed dew swallow-ed by the oyster. Dan. perle, to bubble, sparkle as wine; vand-perlen, water-drops ; G. perlen, Du. borrelen, to bubble up ; E. purl, to run with murmuring noise, to bubble up.

Pearl. See Perk.

Peasant. Fr. paysan, Mid.Lat. pagan-sis, OSp. pages, countryman. Fr. pays, It. paese, country, through a forma, pagense, from pagus, a village.—Diez.

Peat. Properly the sward or sods of turf pared off the surface of land and dried for burning, then extended to the vegeta-ble soil which accumulates in boggy places and is dug for fuel. The origin is the OE. bete, to mend or kindle a fire. The process of paring and burning the surface of poor land, and then taking two or three crops of corn from it, was formerly in use in Devonshire and Cornwall, as it still is in the heaths of N. Germany. The process is thus described by Carew (Bou-cher v. Beate-burning).

About May they cut up the grass of that ground, which is to be broken up, in turfs which they call beating [i. e. fuel].—After they have been thoroughly dried the husbandman pileth them in little heaps called beat-burrowes, and so burneth them to ashes.—The charges of this beating, burning, scotting [scattering], and sanding amount to, &c.

This process was called beat-burning, giving rise to the name of beats or peats for the turfs consumed. In Herefordshire it is called betting. 'To bett, to pare the sward with a breast plough or betting-iron, with a view to burning. The sod when so pared is called the betting; set-ting up the betting, putting fire to the bet-ting.'—Lewis, Hereford. Gl.

Pebble. A rolled stone from the bed of a river or the sea beach. From the sound of broken water. Dan. pible, to flow with small bubbles and a gentle sound, to purl. In like manner Mod.Gr. κοχλάζω, to boil, bubble, κοχλάκιον, a peb-ble ; Gr. χλάζω, to rush, or gurgle, κοχλάζω, to sound like rushing water, καχλάζω, to move with a rustling noise, or a noise like that of pebbles rolled on the shore, κοχλής, a pebble, shingle. Turk. chaghlamak, to make a murmuring or rippling noise in running over rocks or stones, chakil, a pebble.

Peck. A measure for dry things. Fr. pic, a measure of flour containing about nine of our pecks ; picotin, the fourth part of a boisseau (Cot.), a feed of oats.—Scheler.

To Peck. Fr. bec, the beak of a bird ; becquer, to peck or bob with the beak.—Cot.

Pectoral. Lat. pectus, pectoris, the breast.

Peculate.—Peculiar. Lat. peculium, private possession, what a son or a slave has of his own ; peculiaris, of private pos-session, appropriated to a particular per-son or thing. Peculor, -atus, to appro-priate the property of the state.

Pecuniary. Lat. pecunia, money, from pecus, cattle, the earliest kind of riches.

Pedagogue.—Pedant. It. pedanto, pedagogo, a schoolmaster, a teacher of children.—Fl. Gr. παιδαγωγός, from παῖς, child, and ἄγω, to lead, guide. Probably pedante was formed from pedagogo under an impression that the first half of the word must signify teaching. Gr. παιδεύω, to teach.

Pedal.—Pedestrian. Lat. pes, pedis, a foot.

Pedestal. It. piedestallo, G. Fuss ges-tell, πiede, a foot, and stallo, a stand-ing ; G. gestell, a stand, frame, support.

* Pedigree. Petygrewe.—Palsgr. Pedegru or petygru, lyne of kynrede, and awncetrye—Pr. Pm.

In expensis Stephani Austinwell equitantis ad Thomam Ayleward ad loquendum cum eo ipso apud Havant et inde ad Hertinge ad loquendum cum Domino ibidem de evidenciis scrutandis de Pe de Gre progenitorum haeredum de Husey, xxd. ob.—Rolls Winchester Coll. temp. H. IV. Proceed. Archæol. Inst. 1848, p. 64.

Pedlar.—Pedder. A ped in Norfolk is a pannier or wicker basket; a pedder or pedlar, a packman, one who carries on his back goods in a ped for sale. Pedde, idem quod panere, calathus ; peddare, calatharius.—Pr. Pm. Pedder, revolus, negociator.—Cath. Ang.

Peel. I. A shovel for putting bread into the oven. It. padella, any flat pan ; Fr. pælle, pelle, a shovel, fire-shovel, peel for an oven, pan. See Pate.

2. The rind of fruit, thin bark of a stick. Lat. pellis, skin ; Fr. pel, peau, skin, also the pill, rind, or paring of fruit.—Cot. Du. pelle, skin, husk ; pelle van t' ey, the shell of an egg. Fr. peler, to pill, pare, bark, unskin.—Cot. Du. pellen, Sp. pe-lar, to skin, peel. The radical sense of the word is shown in Dan. pille, to pick or strip ; the peel, skin, or shell of a thing being fundamentally regarded as that which is picked or stripped off. See To Pill.

3. A small fortress. W. pill, a stake, a castle, or fortress, secure place.

To Peep. 1. The shrill cry of a young animal is widely imitated by the syllable peep. Gr. πιππίζειν, Lat. pippire, Fr. pe-pier, to peep, cheep, or pule as a young bird.
2. To begin to appear, to show a glimpse through a narrow opening or from behind an obstacle, then to look out from a position of such a nature. An explanation of the connection between this signification and the utterance of a sharp sound was offered under Keek, but probably the connection may spring from a more subjective principle than was there supposed. When we endeavour to sound the highest notes in our voice we strain for a moment without effect, until after a little effort a thin, sharp sound makes its way through the constricted passages, affording a familiar image of a hidden force struggling through obstructions into life ; as the sprouting of a bud through the bursting envelopes, or the light of day piercing through the shades of night. Hence may be explained Dan. at pippe frem (of a bud or seed), to shoot, or peep forth, and the OE. day pipe, rendered by Palsgrave la pipe du jour. We now call it the peep of day, with total unconsciousness of the original image. In the same way Du. kriecke, krieckeling, the dayspring or creak of day, from kricken, Fr. cricquer, to creak. I peke or prie, je pipe hors.—Palsgr.

Peer. Fr. pair (Lat. par, equal), a peer, match, companion ; pairs, vassals or tenants holding of a manor by one kind of tenure, fellow-vassals. Hence cour des pairs, a court-baron, the lord's court, attended by all the tenants of a manor.—Cot. What the court baron was to the lord of an individual manor, the Parliament or assemblage of Peers of the realm was to the sovereign.

To Peer. Two words are here confounded, one from Fr. paroir (Lat. parere), to peep out, as the sun over a mountain, to appear or be seen.—Cot. There was I bid in pain of death to pere By Mercury the winged messengere. Chaucer in R. The other form is peer or pire, to look closely or narrowly, corresponding to Sw. plira, Pl.D. pliren, plüren, piren, to wink, look with half-shut eyes, look closely.—Brem. Wtb.

Peevish. The modern sense of fretful would be well explained by Da. dial. piaeve, to whimper or cry like a child ; at piaeve over noget, to whine over it. But the meanings of the word are very difficult to reconcile. Torriano renders it by It. bisbetico, ritroso, capriccioso, brusco, acerbo ; capricious, self-willed, shy, harsh, intractable. Schifo, quaint, nice, coy, peevish.—Fl. Peevish, revesche, pervers, hargneux, malaise a contenter.—Sherwood. This it is to be a peevish girl That flies her fortune when it follows her. In Craven, a peevish wind is piercing, very cold. Minsheu gives doating, Fr. rêvant, Lat. delirus, as the principal meaning, although, as he refers to overthwart, he seems also to have understood the word in the sense of cross or ill-tempered. In Scotland it signifies niggard, and is used by Douglas in the sense of Lat. improbus. For thou shalt never leis, shortlie I thee say Be my wappin, nor this rycht hand of mine, Sic ane peuische and catiue saul as thine. D. V. 377, 20. His smottrit habit ouer his schulderis lidder Hang pevageiy knit with ane knot togidder. —uncouthly.—D. V. 173, 48.

Peewit. A name taken from the plaintive cry of the lapwing or common plover of our heaths. The imitative nature of the name is shown by the variation of the consonants in the related languages, combined with a preservation of the general likeness. Sc. peeweip, tecwhoap, tuquheit, Du. kievit, G. kiebitz, Fr. dixhuit. E. dial. pew-itt, tew-itt, tyrwhit, peweet, piwipe. The Tyrwhitts bear three plovers in their arms.—N. & Q. July 21, 1866.

Peg. The radical meaning seems what is driven in by force of blows. To peg into a person, to pummel him; to peg away, to move the legs briskly. To pug, to strike ; to puggle, to poke the fire ; pug-top, a spinning-top.—Hal. To the same root belong Dan. pukke, to stamp, to pound; Lat. pugil, a fighter with fists, pugnus, a fist ; pungo, pupugi, to prick.

-pel. -pulse.—Pulse. Lat. pello, pulsum, to beat, strike, thrust, drive out ; pulsus, a beating, the pulse ; pulso,—as, to knock or beat. Hence the compounds Impel, to drive on ; Repel, to drive back ; Compel, to drive together, to constrain ; and Impulse, Repulse, Compulsion, &c.

Pelf.—Pilfer. O Fr. pelfre, goods, especially such as are taken by force, plunder ; pelfrer, to plunder. ' T. V. clamat quod si aliquis—infra manerium de K. feloniam fecerit—et convictus fuerit, habere pelfram, viz. omnia bona et catalla seisire.' —Chart. H. 7 in Lye. 'Pur tute la preie e la pelfre que pris aveient de terre de

Philistim.'—Livre des Rois, where the marginal note runs 'come David descumfist les Amalechites qui ourent pelfree e arse Siolich.' 'La curt arcevesque pelferent come robeur,' they plundered the court of the archbishop like robbers.—Vie de St Thomas de Cant, in Benoit.
Pelfer (-pelfrey), spolium.—Pr. Pm. The verb pelfrer would seem in the first place, like piller, to have signified to peel or skin ; and thence Fr. pelfre, E. pelf, the plunder or booty. Lang. peloufre, peloufo, the husks of chesnuts or of peas ; Piedm. plofra (contemptuously), the skin.
Pellet. It. palla, a ball ; palletta, Fr. pelotte, a little ball. W. pel, a ball ; peled, a ball, a bullet.
Pell-mell. Fr. pesle-mesle, confusedly, all on a heap.—Cot. Written mesle-pesle in Chron. des Ducs de Norm. 2. 4432. Formed by a rhyming supplement to mesler, to mix, like helter-skelter, hubblebubble, &c.
Pellicle. Lat. pellicula, dim. from pellis, a skin.
Pellucid. Lat. pellucidus (per-lucidus), thoroughly bright.
To Pelt. To use a pellet, to throw. Sp. pelotear, to play at ball, throw snowballs at each other, to dispute, quarrel. Fr. peloter, to play at ball, to toss like a ball ; It. pelottare, to bang, thump ; pelotto, a thump, bang, cuff. G. pelzen, to beat or cudgel, seems to be from pelz, a skin or pelt, to dust one's jacket, give one a hiding.
Pelt.—Peltry.—Pelice.—Pilch. Pelt, the skin of a beast; peltry, furs, skins. G. pelz, fur, skin ; Fr. pelletier, a fellmonger, furrier ; pelleterie, the shop or trade of a pelt-monger. Lat. pellis, skin. It. pellicia, pellizza, any kind of fur, also, as Fr. pelisse, a furred garment.—Fl. AS. pylca, pylece, toga pellicea, a furred garment ; in modern pilch confined to the flannel swathe of an infant.
Pen. I. Lat. penna, a feather.
* Pen, 2.—Pound.—Pond. Pen, a fold for sheep, coop for fowl ; also a pondhead to keep in water to drive the wheels of a mill.—B. To pound up water is to stop it back, and thus to collect a head of water or mill-pond, so called from being pounded up. In the same way Sw. damm, a pond, from being dammed up. The parish pound is the inclosure in which straying beasts are confined until redeemed by their owners. AS. pyndan, gepyndan, to shut in, restrain ; pund, septum clausura ; pundbreche, infractura parci.—Leg. H. I. 40. OE. to pund, pun, to pen, to confine. 'Swin ipund ine sti.'—Ancren Riwle, 128. 'Hwon me pund hire :' when they pound her (a cow)—p. 416. 'Moni pund hire worde vorte letten mo ut :' many pound up their words for to let more out—p. 72.
The origin of this expression for restraining or confining seems to lie in the notion of bunging up a hole, or perhaps, to take the derivation still further back, of stopping it up with a bunch of something ; Da. bundt, bunch, bundle. At any rate, we may rest on Swiss punt, ponten, bonten, G. spund, Esthon. pun, a bung, Fr. bonde, a bung or floodgate, bondon, a bung, the connection of which with the forms in question may be illustrated by Lap. puodo, a stopper or covering ; puodot, to stop or shut up, to stop one's mouth, to put to silence (to be compared with 'pundeth ower wordes :' pound up your words — Anc. R.), to dam up water, dam a brook ; quele puodo, a fish-pond, quarne puodo, a millpond.
Penal.—Penalty. Lat. pœna, punishment. Gr. ποινή, properly blood-money (φόνος, bloodshed, slaughter), the fine paid to the kinsman of the slain, thence satisfaction, ransom, requital, penalty.
Penance.—Penitent.—Repent.—From Lat. pœna causa pœnitet, it grieves me, makes me sorry; pœnitentia, repentance or after-sorrow. Corresponding forms are Prov. penedir, penedensa, OFr. pênéer, pênéance, whence the modern penance, penance, the punishment enjoined by the priest as a pledge of repentance.
Pencil. Fr. pinceau, Lat. penicillus (dim. of penis, a tail), a little tail, a painter's brush. To be distinguished from pencell or pensell, a little flag.
Pendant.—Pendent.—Pending.—Pendulum. Lat. pendeo, to hang, pendulus, hanging.
Penetrate. Lat. penitus, inward.
Peninsula. Lat. peninsula ; pene, almost, insula, an island.
Pennon.—Pennant.—Pensell. It. pennone, Fr. pannon, pennon, pennonceau, OCat. panó, Sp. pendone, a pointed flag or streamer, formerly borne at the end of a lance. Hence pennant, in nautical language, a streamer. The origin is Lat. penna, pinna, a wing, fin, battlement; It. pinna, pinnola, the flat flap of anything, as the fin of a fish, flap of a man's ears, float of a water-mill wheel, the outward sides of a man's nose.—Fl. Fr. penne, penon, pennule, a small piece of a thing not altogether separated from the whole (a flap) ; penne de foie, penon, the laps or napes of the liver ; penneton (pan-neton—Trevoux), the bit of a key (hanging from the shaft like the pennon of a lance) ; pennes, pennons, the feathers of an arrow.—Cot. The nn of penna changes to nd in Sp. pendola, a pen, as well as in pendone, a pennon. See Pane.
Penny. Du. penninck, G. pfennig, a small coin. The original meaning was probably coin in general. Thritig scy-lingepenega, thirty shillings in money.—Sax. Chron. 775. Pol. pieniądz, Bohem. penjz, dim. penizek, a piece of money. Magy. penz, money ; pengni, to ring. Manx peng, penny.

-pense. -pend. Pension. Lat. pendo, pensum, to weigh, or be of such a weight; pendo, expendo (to weigh out money), to pay, to expend or spend ; pensio (E. pen-sion), a paying ; penso, compenso, to prize or value, to compensate, recompense, or requite.
Pensive. A secondary application of Lat. pendo, penso, to weigh, is to ponder in the mind, to consider, whence Fr. pen-ser, to think ; pensif, thoughtful, pensive.
Pent-. Gr. πέντε, five, as in pentagon, a figure of five angles ; pentateuch (τεῦχος, a book) ; pentecost, πεντηκοστή, the fiftieth (day).
Penthouse. A corruption of pentice, as the word was formerly written. Fr. appentis, a sloping shed. It. pendice, any bending or down-hanging, the side of a hill, hanging label of anything, a pent-house, hovel, shed.—Fl. Lat. pendere, to hang.
Penury. Lat. penuria, scarcity. Gr. πένεσθαι, to labour, to be poor ; πένης, poor.
People. Fr. peuple, Lat. populus, W. pobl.
Pepper. Lat. piper, Gr. πέπερι.
Per-. Lat. per, through, thoroughly.
Perambulate. Lat. ambulo, to walk.
Perch. Fr. perche, Lat. pertica, a rod.
Perdition. Lat. perdo, perditum, to lose, to destroy. Perdo, from do, to give (per-do, thoroughly to do away), may be considered the active form of which pereo (per-eo, thoroughly to be gone), to perish, is the neuter.
Peregrination. Lat. pereger, a foreigner ; peregri, abroad, from home, in a foreign country.
Peremptory. Lat. peremptorius, ab-solute, without opening for excuses ; per-imo, peremptum, to take away utterly.
Perforate. Lat. perforo, to pierce through ; foro, to pierce a hole.

To Perform. Originally perfourn.
Ergo Poverty and poore men Perfournen the commandement.
And yet God wot unnethe the fundament Parfournid is.—P. P.
—the foundation is hardly completed.
I parforme ; je parforme and je par-fournys.—Palsgr. ' Les queux gens eient plein power de Maire de ceo bien et loialment faire et parfourner.'—Lib. Alb. I. 494. The origin is probably from the office performed by Lat. furnus, the oven, in completing the work of making bread. Fr. enfourner, to put in an oven, also to begin, set in hand or on work ; enfourne-ment, the beginning or first part of a matter ; s'enfourner, to undertake, or embark himself in ; parfournir, to con-summate, perform, furnish.—Cot. It. fornire, to accomplish, finish, furnish. The n seems early to have been changed to m under the influence perhaps of Prov. fornir, furmir, fromir, to fulfil. OHG. frumjan, gafrumjan, facere, perficere, perfungi, exsequi.
Perfume. Fr. parfums, pleasant fumes, delicate smells.—Cot. It. profumo, any perfume or sweet smell.—Fl. Lat. fumus, smoke, vapour.
Perfunctory. Lat. perfunctorie, slight-ly, negligently ; perfungor, perfunctus, to go through with.
Perhaps. A singular combination of the Fr. par or Lat. per, and E. hap, luck, chance. Peradventure, percase, perchance, are similar forms.
Peri-. Gr. περί, about, round about. As in Pericardium (καρδία, the heart). Perigee (γῆ, the earth). Perihelion (ἥλιος, the sun).
Peril. Lat. periculum, It. periglio, Fr. peril, danger.
Period. Gr. περίοδος, a circuit, going a round ; περί, and ὁδός, a route, journey.
Periphery. Gr. περιφέρεια, circumfer-ence ; περί, about, around ; φέρω, I bear.
Perish. Lat. pereo, -itum (per-eo, to be quite gone), Fr. périr, périssant, to perish.
Periwig.—Perruque. A corruption of Fr. perruque, Du. peruik, under the influence of E. wig of the same meaning already existing in the language. The radical meaning is a tuft of hair, a hand-ful, or so much as is plucked at a single grasp. Cotgrave translates perruque, a lock or tuft of hair, giving fausse per-ruque for a wig. From N. plukka, Sw. plocka, Piedm. pluch, to pluck or pick, are derived respectively plukk, plock, pluch, a little bit, a morsel, Piedm. plucon. a tuft of hair ; and Gr. πλόκαμος, a lock of hair, seems to belong to the same class. In the S. of Europe the pro-nunciation is softened by the introduction of a vowel between the mute and liquid, giving It. peluccare, piluccare. Prov. pelucar., to peck, pick, pluck, with the corresponding nouns, Lombard peluch, a particle (bruscolo)—Dict. Milan., also as Sard. pilucca, a tuft of hair.—Diez. In Sp. peluca is developed the sense of a set of false locks, and hence (by the same change from l to r which is seen in Lat. pilus, Walach. piru, hair) It. parruca, Fr. perruque, a wig. See To Pill.
Periwinkle. 1. Fr. pervenche, Lat. vinca pervinca, or simply pervinca. Pro-bably from the mode of growth in an intricate mass of twigs. Lat. vincire, to bind.
2. Properly, in accordance with the vul-gar pronunciation, pennywinkle, the sea-snail. AS. pinewinda, the pin winkle, or winkle that is eaten by help of a pin used in pulling it out of the shell. In the south of England they are called pin-patches. See Winkle.
To Perk.—To Pert.—Peart.—Pert. To perk up the head, to prick up the head, or appear lively. Plants which droop from drought perk up their heads after a shower. Peark, brisk.—B. Perk, brisk, lively, proud.—Forby. Pl.D. (Lippe) prick, smart, fine.—Deutsch. Mundart. w. percu, to trim, to smarten ; perc, trim, neat, compact. In the same sense with a change of the final k into t, to pert.
Sirrah, didst thou ever see a prettier child? How it behaves itself I warrant you ! and speaks and looks, and perts up the head.—B. and F. Knight of the Burning Pestle, I. 2.
Hence peart, brisk, lively; w. pert, smart, dapper, fine, pretty, nice ; perten, a smart little girl. With an initial s, to spurk up, to spring up straight, to brisk up.—B. Sw. spricka, to burst, to crack.
The quality of liveliness carried to excess degenerates into sauciness, and therefore there is no ground to suppose that pert in the sense of saucy is a corruption of malapert. The word is used with more or less of blame from the earliest period.
And she was proud and pert as any pie. Chaucer in R.
Nothing shall be outrageous, neither in passions of mind, nor words, nor deeds, nor nice, nor wanton, pert, nor boasting, nor ambitious.—Vives, ibid.
Pernicious. Lat. neco, to kill; pernicies, violent death, destruction.

Perpendicular. Lat. perpendo, to poise thoroughly; perpendiculum, a level or plumbline for trying the regularity of work.
Perpetrate. Lat. patro (to be a father to), to bring to effect, to achieve, to get.
Perpetual. Lat. perpetuus.
Perry. Fr. poiré (from poire, pear), drink made from the juice of pears.
Persevere. Lat. severus, hard, stern, earnest; persevero, to go through with anything without allowing yourself to be diverted from what you have in view.
Person.—Personify. Lat. persona, a mask (used for increasing the sound of the voice on the stage), a part in a play, a charge or office, a person.
To Peruse. The only possible origin seems Lat. perviso, to observe, but we are unable to show a Fr. perviser, and if there were such a term, the vocalisation of the v in the pronunciation of an E. pervise would be very singular.
Pest.—Pestilent. Lat. pestis, a plague, infection.
To Pester. Fr. empestrer, to pester, intricate, entangle, encumber, trouble.—Cot. Derived by Diez from Mid.Lat. pastorium. It. pastoja, the foot-shackle of a horse; impastojare, to shackle a horse, whence empêtrer for empêturer. The true derivation is the figure of clogging or entangling in something pasty or sticky. It. impastricciare, to bedaub, beplaster.
Mais pour les paluz enpaistroses Granz, parfundes e encumbroses—Ne les vout Rous prendre n'aveir.—But for the sticky marshes (of Flanders) Rollo will not have them.—Chron. des Ducs de Norm. 2. 6695. I comber, I payster with over many clothes.—Palsgr.
Depestrer, to disentangle, clear, deliver, rid out of.—Cot. The same metaphor is seen in Sp. pantano, bog, morass, metaphorically hindrance, obstacle, difficulty.—Neum. When Hotspur complains of being pestered by the fop he has the sense of something sticking about him which he would fain be rid of. So Lang. pego, pitch ; pegou, a troublesome, importunate person.
The sense of overcrowding, is merely a special application of the original figure of clogging ; clogging by excessive numbers.
They within though pestered by their own numbers (clogged and impeded) stood to it like men resolved, and in a narrow compass did remarkable deeds.—Milton, Hist. Eng.
The people—gat up all at once into the theatre and pestered (clogged) it quite full.—Holland, Livy.

Pestle. Lat. *pistillum*, from *pinso*, to pound. See Pistil.
Pet. 1. A fit of displeasure. To take the pet, *se mecontenter*. — Sherwood. Plausibly derived by Serenius from Sw. *pytt!* Dan. *pyt!* Manx *pyht!* Norm. *pyt!* pish! tut! It. *petto*, a blurt (Fl.), *pet-teggiare*, Magy. *pittyni*, to blurt with the mouth. A person in a pet pishes and pshaws at things. Comp. *tutty*, ill-tempered, sullen (Hal.), standing in a similar relation to the interjection *tut!* Swab. *pfausen*, *pfautzen*, to make a sound by letting out pent-up air, to express displeasure by gestures.
Pet. 2.—Peat. Peat, a delicate person, usually applied to a young female, but often used ironically in the sense of a spoiled, pampered favourite.—Nares.
A pretty *peat* 'tis best Put finger in the eye, an she knew why. Taming of the Shrew.
To see that proud pert *peat* our youngest sister. O. Play of K. Lear.
Pet-lamb, a lamb brought up by hand. A *pet* in the modern sense of the word is a favourite child or animal that is made much of, that is petted or indulged in its *pets* or fits of ill-humour.
Petal. Gr. *πεταλον*, a leaf.
Petard. A short, mortar-shaped gun for making a loud explosion; an implement for bursting open a gate with powder. Fr. *peter*, to crack.
Petition. Lat. *peto*, *petitum*, to seek, ask, beg.
Petr-. Gr. *πετρα*, Lat. *petra*, a rock, and (*facio*) *fio*, as in Petrify, to become stone; Petroleum, rock oil.
Petrel. A breast-plate. Sp. *petral*, a breast-leather for a horse; It. *pettorale*, a stomacher, breast-plate; — *di cavallo*, a poitrel for a horse (Fr. *poictrail*, *poi-tral*).—Fl. Fr. *poitral*, the dewlap of an ox.
Petronel. OFr. *petrinal*, *poictrinal*, a petronel, or horseman's piece.—Cot. Doubtless from Sp. *petrina*, a girdle, from the weapon being stuck in the girdle. It is said to have been invented in the Pyrenees. Ultimately from Lat. *pectus*. It. *petto*, the breast; Fr. *poictrine*, *poi-trine*, breast, breast-plate.
Petticoat. Apparently formed as a sort of translation of Fr. *cotillon*, dim. of *cotte*, coat.
Pettifogger. Fogger, a huckster, a cheat; to fog, to hunt in a servile manner, to flatter for gain.—Hal. Milton speaks of 'the fogging proctorage of money.'

The relationship and fundamental meaning of the word are very doubtful. On the one hand we are led to suspect that it may be from a perversion of the name of the Fugger family, proverbial for their commercial eminence. Bav. *fuggern*, to traffic, truck, chaffer; Swiss *fuggern*, to pilfer; Swab. *fuggerei* (A. D. 1510), a trading establishment. Du. *focker*, monopola, pantopola, vulgo *fug-gerus*, *fuccardus*; *fockerije*, monopolium.—Kil. On the other hand Pl.D. *fokken*, *foppen*, to jeer, to play tricks on, to deceive, Henneberg *fuckeln*, to cheat, to trick. Bav. *focken*, *fogken*, to cajole, to flatter, must be from a different source, perhaps from the notion of deceiving the eye by rapid movements, sleight of hand. Henneberg *fickfackerei*, jugglery, tricks, cheating; *fackeln*, to cajole, flatter.
Pettitoes. A corruption of Norm. *petots*, little feet (Pat. de Brai), so modified as to give the word an apparent meaning in E. It. *peducci*, a precisely analogous form of the same meaning, is explained by Fl. sheep's trotters, pig's pettitoes.
Petty. As It. *piccolo*, Sp. *pequeno*, small, from the root *pic*, signifying point, so it seems Fr. *petit*, Wall. *piti*, W. *pitw*, small, are connected with W. *pid*, Grisons *pizza*, G. *spitze*, a point.—Diez.
Pew. Lat. *podium*, an elevated place, a balcony; Du. *puyde*, *puye*, a pulpit or reading-desk.—Kil. 'Hence praying-pew, a desk to kneel at, which was doubtless the earliest form of the church pew.
Pew-fellow, a fellow-scholar, class-fellow, companion at the same desk at school.
Being both my scholars and your honest *pue-fellow*.—Dekker in R.
It. *poggio*, a hill, a turret, out-jutting window, or place to stand or lean upon, a horse-block, high heap or stack.
Pewter. It. *peltro*, OFr. *peutre*, Du. *peauter*, *speauter*.—Kil. Pewter is a mixture of lead and tin, or lead and zinc, and spelter is another name for zinc. Kiliaan gives *espeautre* as Fr. for pewter, which also signifies spelt, a kind of wheat.
Phaeton. From the proper name *Φαεθων*, a son of Apollo.
Phantasm.—Phantasmagoria. Gr. *φαινω*, to show; *φαντασμα*, a vision, fancied appearance; *αγειρω*, to call up, excite.
Pharmacy.—Pharmacopoeia. Gr. *φαρμακον*, a drug, *φαρμακοποιια*, a compounding of drugs (*ποιεω*, to make).
Phase.—Phenomenon. Gr. *φαινω*, to show, appear, p.p. *φαινόμενον*, that which is shown, what appears; φάσις, an appear-ance.
Pheasant. Gr. φασιανός, from the name of the river Phasis.
Phial. Gr. φιάλη, a bowl, cup, vase.
Phil-. Gr. φίλος, a friend to, fond of.
Philtre. Gr. φίλτρον, from φιλέω, to love, a love charm or spell.
Phlebotomy. Gr. φλεβοτόμος; φλέψ, a vein, τέμνω, to cut.
Phlegm.—Phlegmatic. Gr. φλέγμα, inflammation, mucus the proceeds of in-flammation.
Phonetic. Gr. φωνητικός; φωνή, a sound, articulate sound, voice.
Phosphorus. Gr. φωσφόρος, light-bring-ing, Lucifer; φῶς, light, and φέρω, to carry, bring.
Photography. Gr. φῶς, φωτός, the light.
Phrase. Gr. φράζω, to say, speak, tell; φράσις, a speaking, mode of speech.
Phthisis.—Phthisical. Gr. φθίσις, from φθίω, to corrupt, waste away.
Physics.—Physical. Gr. φυσικός, per-taining to (φύσις) nature; Lat. physica, natural science.
Physiognomy. Gr. φυσιογνώμων (judg-ing of nature), judging of man by his fea-tures, outward look; γνώμων, one that knows, an interpreter; γινώσκω, to know.
Piazza. It. piazza, Fr. place, Sp., Port., Prov. plaza, plaga, from Lat. platea, a broad street.
Pick. Du. picken, to peck, to pick, or strike with a pointed instrument; Fr. piquer, to prick; E. pick or pick-axe, a sharp-pointed instrument for striking; It. picco, Fr. pic, a beak, sharp point; Lat. picus, a wood-pecker; W. pig, a point, pike, beak; pigo, to prick, to sting, to pick and choose; It. picchiare, to knock, as at a door, to peck, to clap or beat hard. The origin is an imitation of the sound of a blow with a pointed in-strument. Bohem. pukati, Russ. pukat', to crack, to burst; Lat. pungere, to prick; Pl.D. pinken, pinkepanken, to hammer.
Pickaback. To carry pickaback (for pickpack) is to carry like a pack on one's back. Sw. med pick och pack, with bag and baggage.
* Pickaroon. A rogue. Sp. pícaro, a knave or rogue; mischievous, crafty, merry; It. picare, picardre, to play the rogue, to go a roguing up and down.—Fl. Fr. picorer, to forage, ransack, prey upon the poor husbandman.—Cot. Sc. pickery, rapine, theft. 'The stealing of trifles, which in low language is called pickery.'—Erskine. Picking and stealing.
Picket. Fr. piquet, a peg, a stake; E. pickets, stakes driven into the ground by the tents of the horse in a camp to tie their horses to, and before the infantry to rest their arms about them in a ring.—B. Hence picket, a small outpost.
Pickle. I. A lye of brine or vinegar for preserving food. G. böckel, pökel, Du. pekel, brine; pekel-harinck, a pickled her-ring. The word probably was first applied to the curing or pickling of herrings, the radical meaning being the gutting or cleansing of the fish with which the opera-tion is begun. The Pr. Pm. has pykyn, or clensyn, or cullyn owte the onclene, purgo, purgulo: pykelynge, purgulacio. To pickle, to glean a second time—Forby: i. e. to pick clean. In the same way, to cure fish or meat (to prepare so as to pre-serve from corruption by drying, smoking, salting, &c.—Worcester), is from Fr. écurer, to scour, to cleanse.
Pickle. 2. A mess. 'You are in a pretty pickle.' A pickle is also a child apt to get into a mess, or into scrapes, a mischievous boy. From Pl.D. pickl, a pig. Pick'l, pick'l! a cry to pigs. Pick'l is then used as a reproach to a child who has got himself dirtied: you little pig!—Danneil. Dirty-ing the clothes then becomes the type of youthful scrapes in general.
Picture.—Pictorial.—Pigment. Lat. pingo, pictum, to paint, pigmentum, paint-ers' colours.
To Piddle. To eat here and there a bit—B.; to do light and trifling work. The fundamental idea seems to be to pick, to use the tips of the fingers in doing. G. dial. pittcln, pütteln, potteln, to meddle with anything by slightly pluck-ing, picking, touching, feeling; to piddle in eating, work at anything by small touches. Pittle nicht so in der nase, do not keep picking at your nose. Das ist eine pittliche arbeit, that is very piddling (äusserst subtile) work. N. pitla, to pluck, pick, sip. Sw. pillra (of birds), to plume themselves; G. dial. pitzeln, to whittle, cut little bits—Deutsch. Mund. 2. 236; pitzel, labor parvus.—Westerwald. Idiot. Du. peuteren, to pick or work with the finger; peuselen, contrectare summis di-gitis, varia cibaria carpere et libare, mo-titare digitos, fodicare, carpere.—Kil. W. pid, a point. See Potter.
Pie. I. Fr. pic, Lat. pica, a daw. Piebald, marked like a pie, black and white. See Ball.
2. A pasty.

Piece. Fr. piece, Sp. pieza, bit of any-thing ; W. peth, a part or fragment, some, a little, a thing ; Bret. pes, a piece, bit, piece of land. It. pezza, a piece, clout, patch, rag or tatter ; pezze, rags, tatters, shreds, patches. Spezzare, to split, to shiver to pieces.

Pier. A pier in architecture is the portion of solid wall between two aper-tures, or the solid pillar which stands between two arches of a bridge, also a mole in a harbour to break the force of the sea.
AS. pere, pila, moles, agger ; Du. heere, a pier or mole, apparently from beuren, boren, to raise, to lift. Swiss büren, büh-ren, birren, to raise ; büri, bühri, a pier, a wall or mound raised in the water to protect the adjoining land. Bav. enbor, G. empor, up, aloft ; enboren, emporen, to raise. Geschrei erhaben und emporen, to raise an outcry. Bav. borkirche, G. em-porkirche, the gallery in a church. Purdi, pyra, rogus. Purd-holz, strues.—Gl. in Schm.

To Pierce. Fr. percer, It. perciare. Apparently from the same root which gives us perk, prick ; to perk up, to prick up the head. It can hardly come from It. pertugiare, Fr. pertuiser.

Pig. 1. Du. bigge, big, a pig. Pl.D. biggen un blaggen, unquiet children or young cattle, especially pigs. De biggen lopet enem under de vote, the children run under one's feet.—Brem. Wtb.
2. A sow of iron is an ingot. Pano di metallo, a mass, a sow or ingot of metal.—Fl. When the furnace in which iron is melted is tapped the iron is allowed to run in one main channel, called the sow, out of which a number of smaller streams are made to run at right angles. These are compared to a set of pigs sucking their dam, and the iron is called sow and pig iron respectively. Probably the like-ness was suggested by the word sow having previously signified an ingot.

Pigeon. From Lat. pipire. It. pipiare, pigiolare, to peep or cheep as a young bird, are Lat. pipio, a young pigeon. It. pippione, piccione, pigione, &c. Mod. Gr. πιππίζω, to chirp ; πιππίον, a young dove. In the same way from Magy. pipegni, pipelni, to peep or cheep, pipe, pipök, a chicken, gosling ; and here also the same metaphor, by which a pigeon is made to signify a dupe, gives pipe-ember (ember, man), as Fr. blancbec, bejaune, a booby ; a young bird being taken as the type of simplicity. It. pippione, a silly gull, one that is soon caught and tre-panned ; pippionare, to pigeon, to gull one.—Fl. See Gull.

Piggin. A wooden vessel with a han-dle for holding liquids.—B. The appli-cation to a wooden vessel seems a de-parture from the original meaning. Gael. pige, an earthen jar or pitcher ; pigean, a little jar, a potsherd.

Pike. 1. Fr. pique, a pike, or pointed pole.
Thei profere a man to bete, for two schilynges or thre With piked staves grete beten sall he be.
R. Brunne.
See Pick.
2. The pike-fish is so called from his projecting lower jaw. Bret. bek, a beak, snout, point ; beked, a pike-fish. So in Fr. broche, a spit, a pointed object ; brocket, a pike.

Pikelet. A kind of crumpet apparently of W. origin, being called bara-picklet (W. bara, bread) by Bayley. Fr. popelins, soft cakes of fine flour, &c., fashioned like our Welsh barrapcyclids.—Cot.

Pilaster.—Pillar. Fr. pilastre. It. pilastro, der. from Lat. pila, a column, L.Lat. pilarium, whence also Fr. pilier.

Pilch. A piece of flannel to be wrapt about a young child.—B. See Pelt.

Pilchard. Fr. sard, sardine, a pilch-ard.

Pilcrow. The mark of a new para-graph in printing. Gradually corrupted from paragraph through parcraft, pil-craft, to pilcrow. Paragrapha, pylcraft in wrytynge—Med. ; paragraphus, Anglice a. pargraft in vrytynge.—Ortus in Way.

Pile. A stake driven into the ground to support an erection. Lat. pila, a struc-ture for the support of a building, the pier of a bridge, a mole to restrain the force of water. It. pilare, to prop up with piles, to lay the groundwork of a building, W. pill, stem or stock of a tree ; log set fast in the ground, stake. From the notion of supporting, the signification passes to that of the thing supported, a mass heaped up. Fr. pile, Du. pijl, a pile or heap.

To Pilfer. See Pelf.

Pilgarlick. One who peels garlick for others to eat, who is made to endure hardships or ill-usage while others are enjoying themselves at his expense.
And ye shull here how the Tapster made the Pardonere pull Garlick all the longe nighte till it was nere hand day.—Chaucer, Prol. Merch. and Tale.
The tapster and her paramour were enenjoying the entertainment for which the pardoner had paid. The Fr. have a somewhat similar proverb. Il en pelera la prune, he will smart for it, he is likely to have the worst of it.—Cot.

Pilgrim. It. pelegrino, Lat. peregrinus, a foreigner; from pereger, one who is gone into the country, who is without the city, from per and ager, field. Peregré, abroad.

PILL. Lat. pilula, dim. of pila, a ball.

To Pill.—Pillage. Fr. piller, to rob; Sp. pillar, to seize, lay hold of, plunder; It. pigliare, to catch, take hold of, take.

To pill was formerly used in the sense of extort, strip, rob, and also, where we now use peel, for picking off the husk or outer coat of fruit or the like.

Hear me, you wrangling pirates that fall out In sharing that which you have pilled from me. Rich. III.

To pill (pare, bark, unskin, &c.), peler.—Sherwood. Bret. pelia, to peel, skin; W. pilio, to peel or skin, to pillage, rob; pil, peel, rind.

The figure of fleecing or skinning affords so natural a type of pillage and robbery that we are inclined with little hesitation to accept the sense of peeling as the radical signification of the word.

But further examination brings to light a numerous series of forms, which it is impossible to separate from the foregoing, with the radical signification of picking or plucking, of touching or taking with a pointed implement.

Nor would it be a forced derivation of the name of peel if it were supposed to arise from considering the thing signified as what is pilled or picked off in preparing an article for consumption. Dan. pille, to pick; — sig i hovedet, to scratch one's head; — sig med næbbet (as Sw. pillra), a fowl to pick its feathers, prune itself; — ærter, to shell peas; — ud, op, to pick out, pick up; — barken af et træ, to strip bark off a tree.

At pille ved noget, to work slowly at something. Fl.D. pulen, to pick, pluck, unites the foregoing with E. pull. In der nase pulen, to pick the nose; uut pulen, to pick or pull out; puul-arbeit, piddling work. Se pulet sig, they scuffle, pull each other about, explaining Fr. se piller, said of two persons scolding each other.

Pille! seize him! cry to set on a dog.—Trevoux.

N. pila, to pick, pluck, gnaw; pile, a little bit; Sc. pile, a single grain; a pile of caff, a grain of chaff.

On the same principle the original meaning of Lat. pilare would be to pick, and then to plunder, to make bare or bald, giving pilus, a hair, what is picked at a single touch, as a derivative, equivalent to N. and Sc. pile above mentioned.

From Fl.D. pulen or N. pila appear to be formed as diminutives or frequentatives püleken, pülken, pölken, N. pilka, to pick.

Up den knaken pülken, to pick a bone; Sc. pilk, to pick, as peas or periwinkles out of their shells, to pick a pocket.

Similar diminutival forms are seen in Fr. pilloter, to pick, or take up here and there, to gather one by one—Cot.; Prov. pelucar, Lang. peluca, to pick, to peck; It. pillucare, to pick up clean as a chicken; spiluzzicare, to pick out as it were here and there, to eat mincingly; spiluzzico, the least bit, crumb, or scrap.—Fl.

We may then suppose forms like N. plikka, plukka, G. pflücken, to pick, pluck, Pl.D. plik, N. plukk, Sw. plock, a little bit, Piedm. pluché, to pick or pluck, pluch, a grain, morsel, Norm. plucoter, to pick up grains as fowls at a barn door (Decorde), Fr. éplucher, to pick, as pease, to pluck or tease as roses, wool, &c., to arise either from the absorption of the vowel between the mute and liquid in It. piluccare, Prov. pelucar, as in Piedm. plé, to peel or skin, E. platoon from Fr. peloton; or they may have arisen from the transposition of the liquid and vowel in forms like N. pilka, Fl.D. pülken.

But the true explanation may probably be that there was a double form of the root, with an initial p and pl respectively, pick or puck (Pl.D. puken, to pick) and plik or pluck, while pill or pull may be contracted from frequentative forms like OE. pickle, Grisons piclar, Walach. pigulire, to pick or pluck, Du. bickelen, to pick or hew stone, E. dial. puggle, to poke the fire; or perhaps (as Dan. lille compared with E. little) from a form like N. pitla, to pick, E. piddle, to keep picking.

The contracted form is seen in Du. billen den molensteen, to pick a millstone, compared with bickelen, and in Sc. pile above mentioned compared with pickle or puckle, a single grain or particle of anything, a small quantity.

Pillion. A cushion for a woman to ride on behind a horseman. Gael. peall, a skin, coverlet, mat, bunch of matted hair; pillean, a pad, pack-saddle, cloth put under a saddle; Manx poll, to mat or stick together; pollan, a saddle-cloth.

Sp. pillon, a skin, the use of which (in Sp. S. America) is described in the following passage from the Athenæum, Aug. 9, 1851:

First a long blanket was put upon the horse—then came a wooden concern—in shape like a miller's pack-saddle—then came 13 lamb-skins, each larger than the last, so that when the whole were on, the ends appeared cut square like the thatch of a house. These things are called pil-lones, and in travelling form the bed of the horseman. Then came another pillone made of llama skin.

Pillory. Fr. pilori, Prov. espitlori, Mid. Lat. piloricum, pilorium, spilorium. Different derivations have been suggested, of which the most plausible is Fr. pilier, from the pillar or post at which the crimi-nal is compelled to stand. But the most prominent characteristic of the pillory is the confinement of the neck by a perfor-ated board or an iron ring. Pilorium, sive collistrigium.—Fleta. The prisoner is usually said to stand in the pillory, not at it. 'Condemnat a estar en l'espitlori.'—Cout. de Condom in Rayn. And it is rational to look for the origin to the fuller form of Prov. espitlori, which cannot have been corrupted from Fr. pilori, while the converse may easily have taken place, if the punishment was invented in the South of France, and spread from thence with-out the meaning of the name being cor-rectly understood. Now Cat. espitllera is a loop-hole, peep-hole, little window, which would accurately describe the cha-racteristic part of the punishment, the prisoner being derisively considered as showing his head through a loop-hole to the gazing crowd below. 'Ponetur in pillorico ut omnes eum videant et cognoscant.'—Charter of Rouen in Duc. On this principle the far-fetched derivation was proposed by Cowel ' from πύλη, a gate or door, because one standing on the pil-lory putteth his head through a kind of door, and ὁράω, video.'—Minsheu. 'The cover of the chest is two boards, amid them both a pillory-like hole for the pri-soner's neck.'—Hackluyt in R. The name pillori was given in France to a ruff or collar worn by women encircling the neck like the board of the pillory. To peep through the nutcrackers, to stand in the pillory.—Grose. The word is doubtless equivalent to Lat. specularium, from specula, a look-out, a high place for viewing or watching anything from. Compare Cat. espill, espilleta, from Lat. speculum, a looking-glass; espillets, spectacles, eye-glasses.

Pillow. Du. peluwe, puluwe, Lat. pulvinus, from Lat. pluma, W. plu, pluf, feathers. Pulvinare, plumauc—Gl. Cambr. in Zeuss; pulvinar, plufoc.—Vocab. Cornub. ibid. W. plufawg, fea-thery.

Pilot. It. pilota, Fr. pilote, Du. pijl-loot—Kil., properly a person who con-ducts a ship by the sounding line, from peilen, to sound the depth, to gauge ves-sels; peillood, sounding lead; peil, mark on the scale at the side of a sluice to show the depth of the water. I sownde as a schyppeman with his plommet to know the deppeth of the see: je pilote.—Palsgr. The origin of the term seems to be taken from the pegs by which the capacity of a vessel was marked. Pl.D. pegeln, to sound, also to tope. Dan. at dricke til pæls, to drink for a wager, measure for measure. This in Lat. was termed bibere ad pinnas. Anselm commands, Ut presbyteri non eant ad potationes, nec ad pinnas bibant.—Eadmer Hist. Nov. 101. G. pegel is the height of the water on a fixed scale. Thus a Rhenish news-paper, under the head of 'Wasserstands-nachrichter,' gives 'Oberwesel, 31 Aug.—pegel 7 fuss, 1 zoll.' The other half of the word pilote is doubtless the element shown in G. lootse, Du. lootsman, OE. lodesman, a pilot, which has very naturally been confounded with Du. loot, a sounding lead, whence looten, to sound. But this would be a mere re-petition of the meaning conveyed by the first syllable, and we cannot doubt that the lode in lodesman is the same as in lodestar, lodestone, lodemanage, viz. track or way. The meaning of pilot would thus be one who conducts the vessel by the sounding line. See Loadstone.

* Pimple. AS. pinpel, pustula—Ælfr. Gl.; pipligend, pustulatus; pipligende lic, pustulatum corpus. The word would thus appear to be a nasalised form from Lat. It. papula, a pimple.—Weigand. So Fr. pompon, from Lat. pepo, -onis.

Pin. W. pin, a pin, a pen; Gael. pinne, a pin, peg, plug; Du. pinne, a point, prick, peg.—Kil. Lat. pinna, a fin, a turret, pinnacle. The force of the element 'pin' in signifying a pointed object is also seen in Lat. spina, a thorn, and in pinus, a fir-tree, tree with sharp-pointed leaves, in G. called nadeln, needles.

Pin and Web, an induration of the membranes of the eye, not much unlike a cataract.—B. It. panno nel occhio, a web in the eye. Panni in oculis fiunt et albugines ex vulneribus vel pustulis.—Duc. In pin and web the foreign name is first adopted and then translated.

To Pinch.—Pincers. Sp. pizcar, Fr. pincer, to pinch or nip, to take with the points of the fingers or other points; pince, the tip or edge of the hoof. Sp. pinchar, to prick, pincho, a prickle; pinzas, pincers, nippers. Grisons pizz, pizza, G. spitze, a point, peak ; pizchiar, to nip, itch, bite ; pizzi, a pinch, as much as one takes up with the tips of the fingers. Walach. piscu, point, eminence ; piscd, to nip, twitch. It. picciare, pizzare, to peck, pinch; snip, itch ; piccio, a pinch ; pizze, pinch-works, jaggings ; pizzicare, to prick, pinch, snip ; pizzamosche, a hedge-sparrow, a snap-fly ; Du. pitsen, pinssen, to pinch, pluck.

Pine. Lat. pinus, w. pinwydd, pine-trees, characterised by their pin-shaped leaves, in G. called nadeln, needles, and the wood, nadelholz.

To Pine. Du. pijne, pain, torment ; pijnigen, to torture. See Pain. Hence to pine, to languish as one suffering pain.

Pinfold. — Pindar. Pinfold is commonly explained as a fold in which straying cattle are temporarily penned or confined ; pindar, the officer whose business it is to place cattle in the pound or pinfold. And although it must be observed that a fold is essentially a place for penning cattle, it is probable that if we had the English alone we never should have been led by the tautology to doubt the foregoing derivation. But the foreign analogues give a more distinctive meaning to the term as signifying the fold where cattle are kept in pledge until redeemed by their owners. Du. pand, G. pfand, a pawn or pledge ; pfänden, O Fris. penda, peinda, to distrain or seize by way of pledge ; das vieh pfänden, to pound cattle ; pfand-stall, a pinfold ; pfänder, a pindar, the executive officer whose business it was to levy distraints ; Grisons pandrer, pendrar, pindrar, to distrain ; pandrader, pendrader, the pinder.

Fro the Pouke's pondfalde no mainprise may us fetch.—P. P.

Sc. poind, to distrain, poind, pownd, the distress or property taken in pledge.

The sergents shall cause the poynds to be delivered to the creditor untill the debt be fully payed to him.—Stat. Rob. i. in Jam.

There seems to be no real connection with E. pound, which signifies simply enclosure, unless indeed it is possible that a pawn is something impounded or shut up until properly redeemed.

Ping. Often used to represent the sharp sound of a bullet flying past. Pl.D. pingeln, as klingeln, to ring ; pingel, a bell.

Pinion. Pinion is used in two senses, both applications of the general meaning shown in It. pinna, the flat flap of anything, as the fin of a fish, the flap of a man's ears, the floats of a water-wheel.—Fl. Fr. penne, penon, pennule, a lap or flap (a piece of anything not wholly separated from it—Cot.) ; penne, penon de foie, a lap or lobe of the liver ; pennons d'une fleche, the feathers of an arrow ; pennon, a pennon or streamer, the little flag carried at the end of a lance. The pinion of a bird is the flap or last joint of the wing.

All unawares Fluttering his pennons vain plumb down he falls Ten thousand fadom deep.—Par. Lost.

In the second sense, Fr. pagnon or pignon, a pinion in wheel-work, is a contrivance by which the movement of a cog-wheel is transferred to a different axis. To this effect a sufficient number of palets or longitudinal flaps, like the floats of a water-wheel, are fixed round the axis and made to run in the cogs of the larger wheel. The name of pinion properly belongs to the separate palets, and the term should be pinion-wheel, as Fr. lanterne à pagnons, a pair of trunnion heads, or that which is turned about by the cog-wheel of a mill.—Cot. It. ruota pinnata, a wheel with broad floats.—Fl. It is now commonly given to the smaller of two cog-wheels locking into each other. Lat. pinna was already used in the sense of a float of a water-wheel.

Pink. Fr. pinces, the flower pink (wild gilloflowers.—Minsheu). Probably from the sharp-pointed leaves set in pairs upon the stalk like pincers ; Fr. pince, a tip or thin point. See Pinch.

Pink in the sense of bright flesh-colour is probably from the colour of the flower ; although it may be from pink eyes, small winking inflamed eyes. It. gauzo, blear-eyed, pink-eyed.—Fl.

The application to the sense of acme or point of excellence is apparently taken from the joke in Romeo and Juliet, where Mercutio speaking affectedly uses pink as the type of a flower.

Rom. A most courteous exposition.— Merc. Nay, I am the very pink of curtesy. Rom. Pink for flower !

Mercutio is playing upon words in a forced manner, and if the expression were already current Romeo would never have been made to suggest an explanation.

The names of other flowers are used in the same way.

London thowe arte the flowre of cities all,— Of royal cities rose and geraflour. Song temp. H. V. in Reliq. Ant. i. 206.

Heo is lilie of largesse, Heo is parvenke of prouesse. O. Ballad cited by Steevens.
To Pink. Used in a variety of senses, which may all be explained from a nasal-ised form of the root pik, representing the sound of a blow with a pointed instru-ment. Pl.D. pinken, pinkepanken, to hammer ; pinkepank, a blacksmith. To pink, to cut silk cloth with variety of figures in round holes or eyes.—B. Fr. piqui, pricked, pierced or thrust into ; also quilted or set thick with oylet holes (pinked).—Cot.
One of them pinked the other in a duel (stuck him).—Addison.
In the sense of picking or culling, When thou dost tell another's jest, therein Omit the oaths, which true wit cannot need ; Pink out of tales the mirth, but not the sin. Herbert in Worcester.
The sense of winking, in which pink was formerly used, may be illustrated by Sw. picka (from which pink differs only in the nasalisation), to peck like a bird, and (from the figure of a succession of light blows) to palpitate as the heart. Wink-ing is a vibration of the eyelid, as pal-pitation is of the heart.
And upon drinking my eyes will be pinking. Heywood in R.
Du. pinckoogen, to wink, squinny, sparkle, glitter.—Kil.
In like manner with and without the nasal, G. blicken, to wink, to glitter, E. blink, Pl.D. plinken, plinkogen, to wink, pointing to a root plik, synonymous with pik, in accordance with the view of the relations of the word taken under To Pill.
Pinnace. It. pino, a pine-tree, and met. the whole bulk of a ship, also (as pinaccia, pinassa), a pinnace.—Fl.
Pint. Sp. Ptg. pinta, a spot or mark ; pintar, to paint. Hence probably a pint, a certain measure of liquid marked off on the interior of the vessel. So from Du. pegel, peil, the mark on a scale mea-suring depth or content, Pl.D. pegel, sex-tarius, hemina, a measure of content. Pegeln, as in some dialects of G. pinten, to tope ; Fr. pinteler, to tipple.
Pioneer. Fr. pionier, OFr. peonier, Prov. pezonier, properly a foot-soldier, a common man, then applied to the soldiers specially employed in labourers' work. Sp. peon, a pedestrian, day-labourer, foot-soldier, common man, or pawn at chess.
Pious. Lat. pius, Fr. pieux.
Pip. Pl.D. pipp, G. pipps, zipf, Fr. pepie, It. pipita, Lat. pituita, a disorder of fowls, in which a thick slime forms on their tongue, and the nostrils are stopped up. The name seems to be corrupted from Lat. pituita, phlegm. Du. pipse, the mucus of the nose.
Pipe. A thin hollow cylinder, an im-plement adapted to make a shrill sound by blowing into it. From the imitation of such a sound by the syllable peep. See Peep.
Pippin.—Pip. Fr. pepin, seed of fruit, as of an apple or grape ; pepinière, a seed-plot, nursery ground. There seems no ground for the assertion that the word originally signified a melon-seed, from pepo, a melon. A satisfactory origin may perhaps be found in Da. pippe, to peep, shoot, spring forth. For the connection between a sharp cry and the idea of peep-ing forth, just beginning to appear, see Peep. A pippin in the sense of a particular kind of apple is probably an apple raised from the pip or seed. Da. pipling, a small well-tasted apple.
Pirate. Gr. πειρατής, Lat. pirata, ex-plained from πειράω, to make an attempt on, to attack.
Pish ! An interjection of contempt, equivalent to hold your tongue ! It. pis-sipissare, to psh, to husht, also to buzz or whisper very low ; pissipisse ! pst, hsht ! still !—Fl. Fr. nargues, tush, blurt, pish, fy, it cannot be so.—Cot. Norm. pet ! interj. to put to silence.—Decorde. Dan. pyt! ON. putt! Manx pyht! tut! pooh! pshaw!
Pismire. The old name of the ant, an insect very generally named from the sharp urinous smell of an ant-hill. Du. miere, pismire, mierseycke, an ant ; seycke, urine ; Pl.D. miegemke, an ant or emmet ; miegen, mingere ; Fin. kusi, urine ; kusi-ainen, an ant.
Piss. From the sound. Lett. pischet is a nursery word. In Bav. nurseries wiswis macken, wiseln. Fin. kusi, urine.
Pistil. Lat. pistillum, a pestle, from pinso, to pound.
Pistol. Said to derive its name from having been invented at Pistoia in Italy, but no authority is produced for this derivation. Venet. piston was a kind of arquebuss ; piston de vin, a large flask. —Patriarchi.
Piston. The plunger in a pump or a steam engine. Fr. piston. It. pestone, pestatoio, a pestle, stamper, rammer ; pesta, any treading or trampling ; pestare, to stamp, pound, bray in a mortar, trample upon, to ram or beat in. Lat. pinsere, pistum, to pound.
Pit. I. Lat. puteus, It. pozzo, Fr. puits, a well; Du. put, putte, a well, a hole.
2. The pit of a theatre is probably from Sp. patio, the central court of a house, and thence the pit which occupies the same place in a theatre. Probably from the root pat, plat, representing the tramping of feet. Mod.Gr. πάτω, to tread, πάτος, a public walk, beaten path, bottom, floor. Piedm. platèa, the pit or lowest part of a theatre where the audi-ence stand.—Zalli. Lat. platea, a street, court-yard, area, open space in a house. See Pad.
Pitch. G. pech, Du. pik, Lat. pix, Gr. πίττα, μίσσα, Gael. pic, pitch; bigh, glue, birdlime, gum; W. pyg, pitch, rosin. The main characteristic of pitch is its stickiness, and it can hardly be doubted that the name is taken from this quality.
It. piccare, to prick; piccare, appiccare, appicciare, to fasten, stick unto; appic-cante, appiccaticcio, clammy, gluish, fast-sticking. Sp. pegar, to stick to, fasten on, join together, to infect; pegajoso, sticky, glutinous, infectious; pega, glue, varnish. The Sp. name of pitch, pez, as in the other Romance languages, is taken from Lat. pix, picis, in which the original significance was already obscured by the loss of the root pik in the sense of prick or stick. Gr. πίττα, a fir-tree, is pro-bably, like w. pigwydd (pitch-wood), from producing pitch, and not conversely, as Liddell supposes, the name of pitch from the tree which produces it. See To Pitch.
To Pitch. Pitch and pick are differ-ent ways of pronouncing the same word, like church and kirk. The radical signi-fication is striking with a pointed instru-ment, driving something pointed into, sticking into, darting, throwing to a dis-tance. W. picell, a dart or arrow; picio, picellu, to throw a dart, to dart. To pick a lance was to drive it into an object.
I hold you a grote I pycke as far with an arrowe as you.—Palsgr. in Hal.
To pitch upon is to come suddenly down like a javelin striking the ground at the end of its flight. A pitch-fork, or pikel, as it is called in the North, is a fork for pitching corn, throwing it up upon the stack.
Stakes of yren mony on he pygte in Temese Above scharpe and kene ynow, bynethe grete and ronde. That yef ther eny schippis com er me ywar were, Heo schulde picke hem thoru out (they should pierce through them), and adrenche hem so there.—R. G. 51.
And he took awei that fro the middil, pitching (affigens) it on the cross.—Wickliff in R.
To pitch a tent is to fix the pegs in the ground by which it is held up.
Pitch in the sense of a certain height on a scale, or a certain degree of a quality, is from the notion of marking a definite point by sticking in a peg. The pitch of one's voice is the point which it reaches in the musical scale; the pitch of a screw, the degree in which the thread is inclined to the axis; the pitch of a roof, the de-gree in which the rafters are inclined to each other.
Pitcher. Fr. pichet (Jaubert), Lang. pichier, Bret. picher, W. piser. It. pitero, Sp. puchero, a pitcher or earthen pot; Gael. pigeadh, a pitcher; pigean, a little earthen jar, fragment of earthenware. It. bicchiere, G. becher, a cup.
Pith. Pl.D. peddik, picke, pith; Du. pit, pitte, pith, kernel, the best of a thing. Hereford peth, Devon pith, a crum of bread. Then applied to the crum or soft part, the part which crumbles, which in Pembrokeshire is called the pith. So in Fr. mie, originally signifying a particle or little bit, is applied to the crum or soft part of bread. W. peth, a frag-ment, quantity, a little, a thing. Bret. pez, pec'h, a piece, bit.
Pittance. It. pietanza, pitanza, Fr. pitance, properly the allowance of appe-tising food to be eaten with the bread which formed the substance of a meal, afterwards applied to the whole allowance of food for a single person, or to a small portion of anything. Mid.Lat. pictancia, pitancia, portio monachica in esculentis—lautior pulmentis, quæ ex oleribus erant, cum pictancia essent de piscibus et hu-jusmodi.—Duc. Numerous guesses at the derivation have been made, which have fallen wide of the mark from not attending to the original distinction clearly pointed out by Duc. 'Dum—a cellerarii per totum con-ventum pictantia, i. e. ova frixa, divi-derentur, invisibilem pictantiam ei misit, quod omnibus diebus vitæ suæ pictantiis omnibus carere vellet.' ' Quod si aliqua secundo vocata venire contempserit, in-sequenti prandio ei pitancia subtrahatur.' —Stat. Joh. Archiep. Cant. an. 1278, in Duc. The nun who was late at dinner was to be punished, not by the loss of her dinner next day, but by having to dine on dry bread or vegetables. 'Aquam etiam puram frequentius biberunt, et quandoque pro magnâ pictantiâ (for a great treat) mixtâ vel aceto, vel lacte, nullâ de vino factâ mentione.' Pidance is still used in the centre of France in the original sense. 'Les enfans mangent souvent plus de pidance que de pain.'—Jaubert. Hence we arrive at the true derivation, apidanqant, apitangant, appétissant, giving appetite. A dish is apidanqant when it gives flavour to a large quantity of bread.—Vocab. de Berri.
Pity. Fr. pitié, from Lat. pietas. In the exclamation, what a pity ! the word is probably an adaptation of OFr. quel pechié ! what a sin !
Allas, quel dol et quel pechié ! Benoit, Chron. des ducs de Norm. 2. 408. Mod.Gr. ὦ τί κρίμα ! what a pity ! what a great misfortune ! what a sin !
Pivot. Fr. pivot, the peg on which a door turns ; It. pivolo, a peg.
Pixy. In Devon, a fairy ; pixy-puff, a fuzz-ball, pixy-stool, a toad-stool, pixy-ring, a fairy-ring. Pixie-led, to be in a maze, as if led out of the way by hob-goblins. This in Pembrokeshire is called piskin-led, which seems truer to the etymology. Sw. dial. pus, pys, pysing, a little boy ; pysill, pyssling, little creature, pygmy ; pysk, little unshapely person, dwarf; also goblin, fairy (små troll). Hempjaske, a hobgoblin, brownie. The fairies are called the little people in Wales and Ireland. G. berg-männchen, a goblin. Lat. puer, a boy ; pusillus, little.
Placable.—Placid. Lat. placare, to pacify, to make calm and gentle ; placidus, calm, mild.
Placard. Fr. plaquard, a bill stuck up against a wall; plaquer, to clap, slap, stick, or paste on, to lay flat on, to parget or rough-cast. Du. placken aen den wand, to fix to the wall ; placken, to daub ; placke, a blot.
Place. Fr. place, It. piazza, G. platze. The spot of ground occupied by a body ; vom platz, crack, representing the sound of something thrown smack down. See Plat.
Plagiary. Lat. plagium, manstealing ; plagiarius, a manstealer, and fig. one who steals other men's thoughts and publishes them as his own.
Plague. Lat. plaga, a blow, stroke, wound ; Du. plage, a wound, and met. affliction, torment, disease, pestilence.
Plaice. Lat. platissa, a flat fish.
Plaid. Gael. plaide, a blanket. Goth. paida, a coat.

Plain.—Plan.—Plane. Lat. planus, whence Fr. plain, even, level, plaine, a flat surface of ground. To explain, to level out, to make easy.
-plain.—Plaint.—Plaintiff. Fr. plaindre, from Lat. plangere, to complain, as ceindre from cingere, feindre from fingere.
Plait.—Pleat.—Plite.—Plight. The Bret. pleg, plek, W. plyg, bend, fold, show the root from whence are derived Gr. πλέκω, to twine, braid, plait ; Lat. plica, a fold, and the secondary forms flecto, to bend, and plecto, plexum, to plait, knit, or weave. From the latter verb, or perhaps from the participial form -plicitus (im-plicitus, explicitus), are derived OFr. ploit, and its E. representatives, plait, plight, pleat.
Votre cemise me livrez, El pan desus ferai un ploit— (I will make a pleat in the cloth) Le plet i fet.—Rayn. in v. pleg.
Now gode nece be it never so lite, Yeve me the labour it to sew and plite. Troilus and Cress.
A silken camus lily whight Purfled upon with many a ploit and plight. F. Q.
Walach. pleta, a tress of hair ; impleti, to plait. Boh. plitn, plesti, Pol. pleść, to wreathe, plait, braid. G. flechte, some-thing turned or plaited, a tress of hair or a wattled hurdle, corresponds to Lat. flecto.
Planet. Gr. πλανήτης, a wandering star ; πλανάω, to wander.
Plane-tree. Fr. plane, contr. from Lat. platanus.
Plank. Lat. planca, Fr. planche, G. planke, Boh. planka, plank ; Gr. πλάξ, anything flat and broad.
Plant, -plant. Lat. planta, the sole of the foot, whence probably planto, to plant or set with the foot in the ground ; plantare, plantarium, a separate plant. The original force of the verb is preserved in supplanto, to put the foot under, to trip one up.
To Plash. 1. To plash or splash is to dash about liquids, to dabble in water. G. pladdern, plantschen, plätschern, Sw. plaska, Du. plasschen, to paddle, splash. Du. plasregen, G. platzregen, a dashing shower. Du. plas, plasch, E. plash, a puddle, or shallow pool of rainwater.
To Plash. 2.—Pleach. Fr. plesser, to plash, to fold or plait young branches one within another, to thicken a hedge or cover a walk by plashing.— Cot. Plessis, a plashed or pleached hedge, or a park enclosed with hedges. Lat. plecto, plexum, to plait or knit together; Gr. πλέκω, Lat. plico, to twine, braid, knit.

Plaster.—Plastic. Plaster, Fr. plâtre (piastre), is the material used, when moist and plastic, for daubing walls and ceilings. The material first used for this purpose would doubtless be the mud or clay that is trodden underfoot, and the radical notion is to plash, to paddle or dabble in the wet and dirt. From this source must be explained Gr. πλάσσω, πλάττω, to work in soft and ductile materials, to mould or form, in Mod. Gr. to knead dough; πλαστικός, what may be moulded, plastic; ἐμπλάσσω, to daub over, to stuff in plaster; ἔμπλαστος, daubed over; τὸ ἔμπλαστον or ἔμπλαστρον, Lat. emplastrum, Fr. emplâtre, a plaister or application daubed over with an adhesive medicament. Gael. plàsd, to daub.

Sp. plasta, paste, soft clay, anything soft; plaste, size, fine paste made of glue and lime.

Plat.—Plot. The radical image is the fall of water or of something wet on the ground, with a noise represented by the syllables plats, plat, plot. G. platz, a crack, smack, pop; platzregen, heavy rain that makes a dashing sound in falling; Du. plotsen, to fall suddenly; plots, sudden, unawares; E. platte, to throw down flat—Hal., i. e. to dash down like water.

When I was hurte thus in stound I fell down flat unto the ground.—R. R.

—I fell plump down upon the ground.

G. heraus platzen, to blurt a thing out, to say it plump, without circumlocution, like a wet mass flung down upon the ground.

Ye sayd nothing sooth of that, But, sir, ye lye, I tell you flat.—R. R.

The term is then applied to the fallen object, or to things of similar shape, and as wet things thrown down on the ground spread out in breadth and lie close to the ground, the root comes to signify broad, thin, without elevation. See Flat.

We come nearest the original image in our dial. cow-plat, Da. dial. ko-blat, Swiss plädder, plätter, kuhplädder, a round of cow-dung; pladern, of a cow, to let fall dung. Bav. platz, plätzen, a flat cake; It. piatto, any flat thing, a dish, plate, platter; by met. squat, cowering down, low-lurking; piattare, to squat down.—Fl. In like manner Dan. plet, a spot or stain, E. blot, Da. dial. blat, a drop of fallen liquid, lead to Fr. se blattir (Cot.), blottir, to squat down, lie close to the ground.

Then as a spot of dirt marks a definite place in a garment, G. platz, a broad even part of the surface of the earth, an open place, a place, the space or room taken up by a body. Der markt-platz, the market-place; ein grüner platz, a green plot, grass-plat, or grass-plot. Auf dem platze bleiben, to be killed on the spot.

It will be observed that spot, which originally signifies a drop of liquid, has the same application to a definite portion of ground.

It was a chosen plat of fertile land.—F. Q.

Bav. platten, a bare spot in a wood (kohlplatten, where charcoal has been burnt), explains E. platty (of corn-fields), uneven, having bare spots.

Plate. 1.—Platter. A flat piece of metal, a dish to eat on. It. piatto, any flat thing, a dish, plate, platter; piatto, made flat or level to the ground, by met. squat, cowering down, low-lurking, hushed.—Fl. Piattare, Fr. se blottir, to squat down; plat, flat, plain, low, shallow. The sense of piatto, which Florio treats as metaphorical, is in truth the original, the idea of flatness being commonly expressed from the image of dashing down something wet or soft, which lies spread out and flat upon the ground.

Thus E. squat is related to Dan. squatte, to splash, and flat with Fr. flatir, to dash down liquids. See Plat.

2. Vessels of gold or silver. Sp. plata, silver. The name was originally given to the plates or thin lamina in which it was customary to work crude silver, and ultimately applied to the metal itself. 'Congregaverunt electum aurum regni, et fecerunt in platas, et miserunt in batellos ferratos ad abducendum in Franciam.'—Knyghton, A. D. 1364 in Duc. 'Et quod quilibet Angligena egrediens fines Angliæ—possit secum reportare platam argenti vel auri ad valorem duarum marcarum pro quolibet sacco lanæ—et eamdem platam ferre deberet ad excambium regis, et ibi recipere suos denarios.'—Ibid. A. D. 1340.

Platform. It. piatta-forma, Du. platte-forme, vulgo plana forma (Kil.), the form or pattern of a structure on the level plain.

For which cause I wish you to enter into consideration of the matter, and to note all the islands, and to set them down in plat.—Hackluyt in R.

To be workmanly wrought—according to a plat thereof made and signed by the hands of the lord's executors.—Agreement temp. H. VIII. in R.

God took care to single out the nation of the Jews, and in them to give us a true pattern or platform of his dealings with all the nations of the world.—Sharp, ibid.

The whole platform of the conspiracy.—Bacon in Worcester.

The word is still used in America for the prospectus or plan of political action of a candidate.

From signifying the ground-plan of a building the term is applied to a levelled surface, then to a flat elevation.

Platoon. Fr. pelote, a little ball to play with ; peloton, a clue or little ball of thread. Sp. pelote, goat's hair; pelotón, a large ball, a bundle of hair closely pressed together, a crowd of persons, a body of soldiers. Du. plotte (Kil.), Piedm. platón, a ball.

Platter. See Plate.

Plaudit. -plaud. -plause. -plode. Lat. plaudo, -sum, to make a noise by clapping of hands, to approve of, encourage. Applause, approbation. Explodo, to drive out with clapping of hands, to hiss or stamp off the stage.

* Play. AS. plegan, pleogan, to play, sport, play on a musical instrument.

Play is the exercise of the natural activity of the creature for the mere pleasure of the exertion. Its earliest type is seen in the mimic strife of joyous dogs pretending to worry each other, and all our games take the form of a competition for some object adapted to call forth the powers of the rival playfellows. Thus the name of play may well be taken from a term signifying contention or struggle. In AS. poetry war is called plega gares, the play of the javelin ; æscplega, of the shield ; heard handplega, the hard play of hands. Hearmplega, strife. It appears to me that we must look for the origin to Lat. placitum, in the sense of discussion, contest at law, whence Prov. plag, plait, play, litigation, quarrel, dispute ; plaidejar, playejar, plaegar, to contest, discuss, quarrel ; Sp. pleito, litigation, debate, strife; OFr. plaidier, plaidoyer, to litigate, contest ; plaidier, plaider, badiner, plaisanter, s'amuser, se moquer. — Roquef.

' Le mari—prist a pleidoyer (began to wrangle with) et maudire ledit prisonnier.'—Litt. remiss. A. D. 1373. ' Le suppliant se appoyait d'un mercier, voisin de son père, à la femme duquel mercier et à son varlet il plaidoit et s'esbatoit'—he joked and sported with them.—L. R., A. D. 1392 in Carp.

AS. plegan is used in a very similar sense in Gen. xxi. 9. Sarra behold hu Agares sunu with Isaac plegode, (in our version) saw him mocking Isaac. The same train of thought is seen in Du. pladeren, playeren, pleyten, litigare, contendere, disceptare judicio ; pladeren, plaeyeren, ludere, jocari, nugari ; plaederije, plaerije, ludus, jocus.—Kil. See Plead.

The primary image of play being, as we have seen, what is done for the pleasure of the exertion itself, the term is used in a general sense to signify the exertion of powers of any kind, as when we speak of the play of the lungs or muscles, of giving play to one's mirth or imagination, of the fire-engine playing on the flames or the cannon on the enemy. By a similar metaphor Fr. se jouer is used for doing a thing easily. Faire jouer le canon, les eaux, to bring the cannon or the waters into play ; le jeu d'un ressort, the play of a spring.

To Pleach. See Plash.

* To Plead.—Plea. Lat. placere, to please, to seem good to one, to be one's choice, forms placitum, an opinion, resolve, ordinance, sentence. In the prologue to the Salic laws they are sanctioned by the formula, Placuit atque convenit inter Francos, It seemed good and was agreed upon among the Franks. Thus the term was extended to an agreement or treaty, and from the decisions of the judges it seems to have passed to all the deliberate proceedings of a court of justice, and to the court itself from whence ordinances issued.

Per capitula avi et patris nostri, quæ Franci pro lege tenendâ judicaverunt et fideles nostri in generali placito nostro conservanda decreverunt.—Capitula Caroli Calvi in Duc.

The course of corruption from placitum to Fr. plait, plaid, is well shown in the Prov. forms plach, plag, placht, plait, plai, suit, process at law, quarrel, dispute.—Rayn. In OPtg. according to Diez the form is placito, afterwards plazo, prazo. It. piato, piado, a plea.—Fl. Sp. pleito, covenant, contract, debate, strife, litigation, legal proceedings. In the language of the Grisons the sense has been further generalised. Plaid, pled, word ; — da Dieus, the word of God ; dar buns pleds, to give good words ; surplidar, to persuade.

To Please.—Pleasure. Fr. plaire, plaisant, to please ; plaisir (direct from Lat. placere, as loisir from licere), pleasure.

Pleat. See Plait.

* Pledge.—Plevin.—Replevy.

It. pieggio, Fr. pleige, plege, Mid.Lat. plivius, pligius, plejus, plegius, a surety, one who undertakes for; plivium, Prov. pliu, promise, guarantee, pledge; plevir, plivir, Fr. plevir, pleuvir (Mid.Lat. plegire), to engage, to guarantee; plevine, pleuvine, OE. plevin, warrant, warranty, assurance. To replevy (Mid.Lat. replegiare) goods taken in distress, is to take them out of the hands of the distrainer on giving security to answer his claim at law; replevin, the act of entering on such an arrangement. Replegiabilis, replevissable.—Duc.
The origin of these terms has been sought in Lat. præes, prædis, a security, and is explained by Diez from præbere fidem, which is not more satisfactory. It seems to me that we have solid ground in Mid.Lat. placitare, to negotiate, agree with; placitum, OFr. plaid, plait, convention, agreement, engagement. 'Cepitque castrum quod dicitur Hocfiburg, et Theotecaira placitando sibi conquisivit.'—Ado Viennensis, A.D. 743 in Duc. 'Taliter placitatum est fide media et condictum.'—Eric. Upsal. ibid. In the famous treaty preserved by Nithardus, 'Et ab Ludher nul plaid nunquam prindrai qui meon vol cist meon fradre Karle in damno sit'—nullum pactum inibo. 'Firent pais e plait al rei David.'—Livre des Rois. The next step is supplied by Grisons pladir, plidir, to engage, as a servant. From hence, as from Lat. adulterium to It. avoltero, E. avowtery, we pass to Fr. plevir, the v of which passes into the soft g of pleige, plege, as in Fr. leger from Lat. levis. 'R et A fide interposita plegiverunt quod censum istum Y et ejus hæredibus bona fide garandizabunt'—Chart. A.D. 1190 in Carp. Se pleger, to commence a suit; plegeur, a plaintiff in an action.—Cot.
To the same class of words belongs E. plight, to engage, corresponding to Fr. plait, agreement, accord, although it is probably not directly from that source. Lat. placitum becomes in Prov. placht, plag, plach, plait, play; while placitare assumes the forms of plaidejar, plaideyar, playejar, plaegar, to litigate, treat, make accord. Quan lo plag es comensat—when the plea is begun—Rayn. in v. Part. From the form placht we pass to Du. plickt (Holl. Sicamb.), judicium, lis, litigium; plichten, plechten, agere lites; plechten (Fland.), spondere merces probas esse, to warrant or guarantee.—Kil. Placitum, Fr. plait, plet, in the sense of duty payable to the lord on the death of the tenant or other occasion must probably be explained in the sense of engagement, payment that the tenant has bound himself to make, and thus we account for Du. plecht, plicht, plegh, officium, debitum, obligatio et census, tributum, et munus, officium; plichtvrij, immunis; plichtig, devinctus, obnoxius.—Kil. G. plicht, promise, engagement, obligation, duty. In like manner the Prov. forms plag, plaegar, above-mentioned, correspond to Mid.Lat. pligare, to engage, to plight; pleyare, to give or take in pledge.— 'ipse Petrus custus pro parte supradicti monasterii pligaret se cum rationem suam, et cum rationibus jam dicti monasterii'—should bind himself with his own means and those of the monastery.—Chart. A.D. 1020 in Carp. MHG. phlegen, verpfligen, to assure, warrant. Ic pflige mich, I undertake. Des vil ic iu verpflegen, as OFr. ce vos plevis (Rayn.), I warrant you. Du. pleghe, plech (Sax.) officium et servitus patrono a cliente præstandum.—Kil.
Plenary.—Plenty, -plenish, -plete. Lat. plenus, full, from pleo, extant in impleo, to pour in, to fill. So Lith. pilnas, Lett. pilns, pils, from Lith. pillu, pilti, to pour. Pildyti, to fill, complete, fulfil. Gr. πλέος, full; πίμπλημι, to fill.
Plenitas, OFr. plenté, fulness, plenty. Compleo, -pletus, to fill up to the top, to accomplish, complete. Repleo, repletus, to fill again, fill to overflowing.
Pleonastic. Gr. πλεοναστικός, redundant, πλεονάζω, to be more than necessary; πλέον, more.
-plete. — Complete. — Expletive. — Repletion. See Plenary.
Plethora. Gr. πληθώρη, fulness, satiety; πλήθος, abundance; πλέος, full.
Pleurisy. Gr. πλευρά, -όν, a rib, in plur. πλευρά, the ribs, side; πλευρίτης, disease of the side.
Pliable.—Pliant. See To Ply.
-plic-. -plex. Lat. plico, -as, to fold; plica, a pleat or fold; complicatio, a folding together. Implication, a folding of one thing in another. Supplication, a bending under of the knees in humility when making a petition. Lat. -plex is used as E. -fold in simplex, singlefold, duplex, twofold, multiplex, manifold. Hence also complex, folded together, involved. See To Ply.
Plight. OFr. ploit, fold, bending, thence state and condition. See Plait. The plight of the body, l'habitude du corps.—Sherwood.

Tantost le met en si mal ploit A po li fait le cuer criever.—He soon puts him in so bad a plight he nearly breaks his heart.—Fabliau of Miller and Clerks in Wright's Anecdota Lit., p. 22.
Bret. *pleg; plek*, fold, bending, inclina- tion, tendency, habit. In the same way they speak in Fr. of affairs taking *un mauvais pli, une mauvaise tournure*, fall- ing into a bad condition. *Il a pris son pli*, the habit is formed. *La tournure d'une affaire*, the turn that things take, the condition of the business.
It is observable that G. *pflicht*, from *pflegen*, was frequently used in a sense closely approaching that of E. *plight*: guise, fashion, condition, or sometimes as the termination *-ness*. In *keiserlicher pflichte*, in imperial fashion, as becomes an emperor; in *ordenlicher pflicht*, in an orderly way; an *armlicher p.* in poverty; *mit williger p.* with obligingness. *Ich lebe in grozes nides p.* I live in a state of great hatred.—Zarncke. Compare, With eyes sore wept he in *mornyng plight*. Rom. of Partenay, 3968.
To Plight. See Pledge.
Plinth. Gr. *πλίνθος*, a brick or tile, the plinth or flat tilelike member on which a column rests.
To Plod. The primitive sense of *plad* or *plod* is to tramp through the wet, and thence fig. to proceed painfully and labo- riously.
I am St Jaques' pilgrim thither gone, Ambitious love hath in me so offended That *barefoot plod* I the cold ground upon. All's Well, III. 4.
Coming to a small brook, I perceived a hand- some lass on the other side, who according to the custom of the rustick Irish tucked up her coats to the waste, and so came *pladding through*.—Eng- lish Rogue in Nares.
To *plowd*, to wade.—Grose. Gael. *plod, plodach*, a puddle.
In a foul *plodde* in the *strete suththe* me hym slong.—R. G. 536.
C. *pladdern, plantschen*, to dabble, paddle; Da. *pladder*, mire.
—plore. — Deplore. — Explore. Lat. *ploro*, to weep, wail; *deploro*, to lament, deplore. It is hardly possible to imagine a connection between the sense of *explore*, to search out, and that of wailing.
Plot. A parallel form with *plat*, sig- nifying spot, spot of ground, then the ground occupied by a structure, the ground-plan. To *plot out*, to plan, to lay out the ground for a design.

And squaring it in compass well beseen There *plotteth* out a tomb by measured space. F. Q. in R.
Hence figuratively *plot* is used for a de- sign of future action, and originally it was as far from implying blame as *plan* is now.
So forth she rose and through the purest sky To Jove's high palace straight cast to ascend, To prosecute her *plot*.—F. Q. III. 11.
Accident has appropriated *plan* to a de- sign of open action; *plot*, to one of secret machination.
Plough. G. *pflug*, Pol. *plug*. Boh. *pluh*. Perhaps from the plough having been a plug or peg, a stake pushed along through the ground. G. *pflock*, a peg. 'The plough, a sort of long wooden plug dragged through the soil, having an effect much like that of a subsoil plough.'— Olmsted's Texas. Modenese *piod, piew, pioca*, a plough, may be compared with Fr. *pieu*, a stake.—Murat. Diss. 19. 84. Dan. *pldg, plok*, a peg; *plov*, a plough. Sw. *plig*, peg; *plog*, plough.
* Plover. Fr. dial. *pluvier*, as if be- tokening rain. Lat. *pluvialis*, rainy. The G. name is *regenpfeifer*, the rain- piper.
To Pluck. Du. *plucken*, G. *pflücken*, N. *plikka*, Dan. *plukke*, Piedm. *pluché*, Grisons *spluccar*, Fr. *éplucher*, to pick, pluck, gather. The radical meaning of the word is preserved in Rouchi *pluquer*, to peck, to pick up crumbs, Yr. *pluguoter*, to pick nicely—Cot. Champ. *pluchoter*, to pick in eating, or with the pronuncia- tion softened by the insertion of a vowel between *p* and *l*, It. *piluccare, peluccare*, to pick one by one, to pick up clean, as a chicken doth corn.—Fl. From this sense of the verb are formed nouns sig- nifying a small portion, so much as is picked at once, Piedm. *pluch*, Milan. *peluch* (bruscolo), a crumb, particle. Ai. *n'é pa'n pluch*, there is not a morsel. Pl.D. *plik-schulden*, small debts; *plik- kerie*, small matters; Sw. *plockwis*, by little and little; *plock*, things of small value; Dan. *plukkeri*, trumpery. Du. *plugghe*, *res vilis et nullius valoris*.—Bigl. It is in this latter sense that E. *pluck* must be understood, when it is applied to the heart, liver, and lights of cattle, food of little estimation consumed by the poorer classes.
From what has been said under *Pill* it will be seen that there is some difficulty in tracing our way with certainty through the variety of related forms to the original root. It would seem however that in pick and plick, or pluck, we have one of those cases where the root appears under a double form, with an initial p and pl respectively, as in E. paste and Sp. plaste, E. pate and G. platte, Sp. patio and Piedm. platia, pit, Du. paveien and plaveien, to pave, peisteren and pleisteren, to plaster, &c.
Plug. Sw. pligg, a peg; Du. plug, a bung, a peg; Pl.D. plugge, a peg, a blunt needle; plukk, a block, clog, log, peg, plug, wadding of a gun. Gael. ploc, strike with a club, block, or pestle; as, a noun, any round mass, a clod, club, bung, stopper; pluc, beat, thump, a lump, bunch, bung. Fin. pulkka, a peg, tap, wedge; pulkita, to plug, wedge, compress; Esthon. pulk, peg, round of a lad-der, bung of a cask. Russ. polk, Boh. pluk, a troop, regiment.
The sense of a projection, lump, round mass, is commonly expressed by a root signifying strike, and the act of stopping or plugging takes its designation from the bunch of materials with which the orifice is stopped. Compare Fr. boucher, to stop; with E. bush, a tuft of fibrous matter. From the notion of a bunch of something thrust in to stop a hole, the signification passes on to a peg or elongated body driven in for the same purpose.

Plum. I. G. pflaum, ON. ploma, plum-ma, Du. pruim, OberD. prume, praume, Lat. prunum.
2. Plum, light, soft; plim, stout, fat; to plim, to fill, to swell.—Hal. Fr. potelé, plump, or plumme, full-round; potelé, plump, full, fleshy, plumme.—Cot. Not-withstanding the close resemblance, the word is distinct from plump, being the equivalent of G. pflaum in pflaum-federn, down, swelling, fluffy feathers. Bav. pflaum, down, loose foam, froth. To the same root belong Lat. pluma, W. plu, pluf, feathers, down, and E. flue, fluff, light, downy flakes. From pluff a parallel form with puff, to blow. Pluffer, a pea-shooter; pluffy, spongy, porous, soft, plump.—Hal.

Plumb.—Plummet. A ball of lead suspended by a line to show the perpen-dicular. Fr. plomb, Lat. plumbum, lead.
Plumbago.—Plumber. Lat. plum-bum, lead, plumbarius, a worker in lead, plumbago, a vein of natural lead.

Plume. Lat. pluma, a soft feather; W. plu, pluf, feathers. See Plum.

Plump. The radical image is the sound made by a compact body falling into the water, or of a mass of wet falling to the ground. He smit den sten in't water, plump! seg dat. He threw the stone into the water; it cried plump! Plumpen, to make the noise represented by plump, to fall with such a noise. He full in't water dat het plumpede. He fell into the water so that it sounded plump. — Brem. Wtb. Bav. plumpf, plumps, noise made by something falling flat with a dull sound. Sw. plumpa ned i 'vandet, to plump or plunge into the water; plumpa ned ett papper, to let a blot fall on paper. To tell one something plump is to blurt it out, to tell it without circumlocution, like a mass of something wet flung down upon the ground, or a stone which sinks at once, without a splash, into the water. And as it is only a compact and solid mass that makes a noise of the foregoing description, the term plump is applied to a compact mass, a cluster; a plump of spears, of wildfowl, of rogues, of gallants. It is then used to signify a thick and massive make. G. plump, massive, lumpish, rounded. Ein dicker und plumper kerl; ein plumpes gesicht, a plump face. In a similar way, from Dan. pludse, Du. plotsen, to plump down, to plunge, are derived Dan. plud-set, swollen, bloated, pludsfed, chubby, Pl.D. pluizig, pudgy, chubby. Plutzige finger, round fleshy fingers. Swiss blunt-schen, the sound made by a thick heavy body falling into the water; bluntschig, thick and plump; bluntschi, a thickset person. Sw. dial. flunsa, to fall into water with a plashing noise; Sw. flunsig, plump, over-corpulent; flunsa, a short pudgy girl. Gael. plub, sound as of a stone falling into water, a sudden plunge, a soft unwieldy lump, plubach, jolt-headed, chubby-headed. This plub with inversion of the l (as in blob, bleb, compared with bubble) explains Cleveland pubble, plump, stout, fat.

Plunder. Pl.D. plunne, formerly plun-den, rags, thence in a depreciatory man-ner, clothes of poor people. Wedekind toch an toreten plunden, alse ein bedeler, Witikind put on torn clothes like a beg-gar. Mine beten plunnen, my bits of things. Du. plunje, sailors' clothes; plunje kist, clothes-chest. G. plunder, things of little value, lumber, trumpery; plunder kammer, lumber-room. Hence Du. plonderen, plunderen, to seize on the goods of another by force, to plunder.

To Plunge. Fr. plonger. Du. plotsen, plonssen, plonzen, to fall into the water—Kil.; plotsen, also to fall suddenly on the ground. The origin, like that of plump, is a representation of the noise made by the fall. Swiss bluntschen, the sound of a thick heavy body falling into the water. To blunge clay (among potters), to mix up clay and water, and Du. blanssen (Biglotton), to dabble, are forms of similar construction.

Plural. Lat. pluralis; plus, pluris, more.

Plush. Fr. peluche, Piedm. plucia, plush ; Du. pluis, flock, flue, lock, also plush, a kind of cloth with a flocky or shaggy pile. We have traced (under Periwig) the line of derivation from the root pluck to Sp. peluca, a lock or tuft of hair, a handful, so much as is taken at a pluck. Now the final ck of pluck is softened down in Fr. s'plucher, pluchoter, to the sound of sh, corresponding to z in Du. pluizen, Pl.D. plusen, to pick, pluck, strip, whence pluis, in the senses above mentioned.

To Ply. -ply. From Lat. plicare, to bend or fold, are It. piegare, Prov. plegar, pleiar, Fr. plier, to ply, bend, bow ; piegatoie, benders or bowing-plyers.—Fl. The compounds applico, implico, produce Fr. appliquer, to apply, bend, bow unto, and impliquer, to infold, enwrap, and fig. to imply ; It. impiegare, to employ ; Fr. s'employer, to set himself about, to apply himself unto, to labour, be earnest upon. Lat. applicare in littus, to arrive at land. Per mare Asiam applicare, to pass over to Asia. Ad philosophiam, ad eloquentiam se applicare. From these may be understood the force of E. ply, to give one's mind to, to be intent upon.—B. 'Her gentle wit she plies to teach him truth.' 'Thither he plies undaunted' (Milton), bends his course. Walach. plecà, to bend ; plecu la fuga, I take flight ; plecu la drumu, I ply the road, set out on a journey. Mid. Lat. plicare vadia, to give pledges. To ply one's heels, to ply for hire, &c. Parallel with the foregoing are AS. plegg-gan, G. pflegen, to attend to, to take care of. Plegge on his bocum, incumbat ejus libris.—Lye. Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends.—Shakesp. MHG. arzenie pflegen, to cultivate medicine ; slafes p. to sleep ; aventiure, der Eren p. to seek adventures, honour ; des altars p. to serve the altar ; pflege, what a man is occupied in, employment. Die wile er was in dirre pflege, while he was in this employment.—Zarncke.

Pneumatic.—Pneumonia. Gr. πνέω, to breathe ; πνεῦμα, -τος, breath, wind ; πνευματικός, belonging to the wind or air ; πνεύμων, the lungs, whence pneumonia, disease of the lungs.

To Poach. Fr. pocher, to thrust or dig out with the fingers. Oeuf poché, a poached egg. Pocher le labeur d'autrui, to poche into or incroach upon another man's employment.—Cot. So E. to poach, to intrude in search of game on another man's land. The word is merely a dialectic variation of poke, to thrust with a pointed instrument. They use to pocke them (fish) with an instrument somewhat like a salmon spear.—Carew in R. For his horse, pocking one of his legs into some hollow ground, made way for the smoking water to break out.—Sir W. Temple, ibid. To pock, to push ; to potch, to poke, to thrust at, to push or pierce ; to pouch, to poke or push.—Hal. Swiss putschen, butschen, biltschen, to thrust, push with the horns. * When clay land in wet weather is said to be poached or trodden into holes by cattle, it may be doubtful whether the word is the foregoing poche for poke, or whether it may not correspond to the patch or podge in hotchpotch, hodgepodge. Banff potch, to trample into mud, to work in liquid or semi-fluid substance in a dirty way, to walk through mud or water. G. patschen, to dabble or tramp in mire ; patsch, mud, mire. To poach would then be to tread into mire.

Pock. Du. pocke, pockele, puckele, a pustule, a bubble, as it were, of morbid matter breaking out of the flesh. Pukkel, peukel, a pimple. Fr. boucle, a bubble. See Buckle. Cotgrave calls pustules water-powkes. In Da. kopper, small-pox, the consonantal sounds of the root are transposed, and here also we are led to a similar origin in Fin. kuppa, kuppelo, kupula, a bubble of water, tumour, pustule. G. blase and Fr. ampoule signify both a bubble and a blister or pustule.

Pocket. See Poke.

Pod. The analogy of cod, which signifies a bag, a cushion, as well as the pod or bag-like fruit of beans and peas, would lead us to connect pod with Da. pude, Sw. puta, a pillow or cushion. The word may indeed be a parallel form with cod, as E. poll with ON. kollr, top, head.

Podgy. See Pudgy.

Poem.—Poesy.—Poet. Gr. ποίημα, ποίησις, ποιητής, from ποιέω, to make, compose ; thence Lat. poema, poeta.

Point.—Puncture.—Punctual.—

Pungent. Lat. pungo, pupugi, punctum, Fr. poindre, to prick; punctum, Fr. poind, point, a prick, point.
Point Device. See Device.
To Poise. Fr. poiser, peser, to weigh, from poids, Lat. pondus, weight. Matters of great poise, matters of weight.
Poison. Fr. poison, from Lat. potio, a drink. Mid.Lat. impotionare, to poison. Diez points out a similar euphemism in Sp. yerba, Ptg. herva, properly herb, then poisonous herb, poison, and in G. gift, originally a dose, what is given at once, then poison.
Poke.—Pocket.—Pouch. ON. poki, Du. poke, poksack, Fr. poche. Norm. pouque, pouche, pouquette, sack, wallet, pocket; that into which anything is poked or thrust.—Richardson. But if the word be identical with E. pock, a pustule (Rouchi poques, poquetes, small-pox), the radical would seem to be a bubble taken as the type of a hollow case. See Pock. It is possible, however, that the ultimate signification may be simply protuberance, from the root pok, in the sense of strike.
To Poke.—Poker. Du. poken, to poke; poke, a dagger. ON. piaka, to thrust, to pick; N. paak, pjaak, Sw. påk, a stick. Probably the change to a broader vowel in poke, as compared with pick, represents a thrust with a coarser instrument. A similar relation is seen in stoke, to poke the fire, to thrust with a large instrument, as compared with stick, to pierce with a pointed instrument. Rouchi poque, blow with a ball. Recevoir eune bone poque, to get a good blow.
A parallel form of root is found with a final t instead of k. E. dial. pote, poit, to push or kick; firepoit, a poker—Craven Gl.; W. pwtio, to poke, to thrust; Sw. påta, to turn up the ground, feel in one's pocket; peta, to poke the fire, pick one's teeth. Sc. paut, to strike with the foot, kick, stamp.
Pole. Sw. påle, a stake, pale, pile; Lat. palus, a pole.
Pole.—Polar. Gr. πολέω, to turn up, turn about; πόλος, a pivot, hinge, axis, the axis of the sphere, the vault of heaven. Fin. palaan, pallata, to roll, to return; Lap. pale, turn, occasion.
* Poleaxe. An axe with a hammer at the back; the implement used by butchers in felling an ox. Should properly, it seems, be written pollaxe, an axe for knocking one on the poll or head. Du. bollen, to fell, to knock down with an axe or mallet, from bol, the head.

Polecat. Du. pool-kat, an animal distinguished by its offensive smell, whence the Fr. name putois, from Lat. putere, to stink. To stink like a polecat.—Ray's Proverbs. Sanscr. pūtika, stinking; pūtika, a civet or polecat. The origin of the E. name is OFr. pulent, pullent, stinking.
Polemic. Gr. πόλεμος, war.
Police.—Policy.—Politics. From Gr. πόλις, a city, we have πολίτης, a citizen; πολιτικός, belonging to a citizen; πολιτεία (whence It. polisia, Fr. police), citizenship, administration, government.
Policy. A policy of assurance is a written engagement to make good a certain sum on the occurrence of a specified contingency. It. pólizza, a bill or schedule; polizza di carico, a bill of lading, a document which it was necessary to produce on applying for the money assured on goods lost at sea.
The word is a violent corruption of Lat. polyptycha, -um. A pair of tablets folding on each other used as a memorandum-book was called diptycha, from δίπτυχος, two-fold. The term was then applied in ecclesiastical language to the catalogues of the bishops and other notables of a church, whose names were read at a certain period of the service. When the list was too long to be contained in a pair of tablets the additional tablets gave the memoranda the name of polyptycha, a term specially applied to the registers of taxes. Polypticos, i. e. breves tributi et actionis.—Glossae ad Cod. Theod. Ut illi coloni tam fiscales quam et ecclesiastici, qui sicut et in polypticis continentur, et ipsi non denegent carropera et manopera.—Edict. Car. Calv. in Duc. Reditus villarum nostrarum describere jussit, quod polyptychum vocant. The term then appears in the corrupted forms of puleticum, poleticum, polegium. Episcopus divino consilio usus, poleticum quod adhuc in eadem ecclesia reservatur scripsit.—Duc. A similar corruption converted diptychus into diptagus, diptititus.
Poll.—Pollard. Pl.D. poll, head, head of a tree or plant, top, tuft; ODu. polle, polleken, vertex capitis, capitellum, cacumen, fastigium; bol, bolle, globus, spaera, caput; bolleken, capitulum, capitellum.—Kil. Sw. dial. pull, top, crown of hat. To poll, to cut off the poll or top, or sometimes to reduce to a poll or rounded summit (as Sw. stympa, to cut short, from stump, or ON. bola, to cut off, from bolr, trunk), to clip the hair; a polled sheep or cow, one without horns; pollard, a tree whose top has been cut off, a deer that has lost its horns. Parallel with the foregoing are a series of forms in which the initial p is replaced by k. ON. kollr, top, stump, skull; kollóttr, polled, hornless, bald; N. kollut, hornless, bald, without point, stumpy; Pl.D. köll, top of tree; köll'n (Danneil), to cut off the head, to poll. Sc. coll, cow, to poll the head, to cut, clip, lop; collie, a shepherd's dog, which has commonly the tail cut short. The radical notion seems to be a round knob. Hesse kulle, a bowl.

Pollute. Lat. polluo, pollutum. Pelt. A thump or blow.—Hal. Hence polt-foot, a club-foot, the notion of a blow and of massiveness being frequently connected. Fr. poulser, to push, thrust, justle, joult. Lat. pulsare, pultare, Sw. bulta, to knock or beat. Manx polt, a blow, stroke, thump, or the noise which it makes.

Poltroon. Fr. poltron, a scoundrel, also a dastard, coward, sluggard, base, idle fellow.—Cot. It. poltrone, an idle fellow, a base coward, base rascal, knave. Exam. poltrare, poltrire, to loll and wallow in sloth and lithernefs, to lie lazy in bed; poltra, a bed to lie on a-days.—Fl. G. polster, a mattress, cushion. In latter times the signification has been so much confined to the idea of cowardice that the derivation has been obscured. Fr. paillard is an analogous form, signifying in the first place a lie-a-bed, from paille, straw, then a rascal, scoundrel, filthy fellow.—Cot.

Poly-. Gr. πολύς, many; as in Polygamy (γάμος, marriage), Polyglot (γλῶσσα or γλῶττα, the tongue), Polypus (πούς, a foot), &c.

Pomander. A musk-ball, little round ball made of several perfumes. Fr. pomme d'ambre, an apple of amber.—B. Sp. poma, a perfume-box, round vessel pierced with holes for containing perfumes.

Pomatum. Originally made with apples, as appears from the receipt in Pharmacop. Lond., 1682. Axungiæ porcinæ recentis lib. ii. &c.; pomorum (vulgo pomewaters) excorticatorum et concisorum lib. i. &c.—N. and Q.

Pommel. Fr. pommeau, pomelle, as It. pomolo (dim. of pomo), an apple, by met. any round head, knob, or pommel, as of a sword or saddle, a pin's head, head of a nail.—Fl.

To Pommel. Plausibly derived from the notion of striking with a knobbed implement, like the pommel of a sword. But the root pum is used to signify striking, from direct imitation of the sound of a blow, which is represented in Pl.D. by the syllable bums!—Brem. Wtb. Bav. pumsen, to sound hollow, to beat, strike against so as to resound. Lang. poumpi, to beat, to knock. Craven pum, to thump, whence pummer, poomer, a thumper, anything very large of its kind, explaining boomer, the name given in Australia to the largest kind of kangaroo. The two derivations would be made to agree if Lat. pomum itself were one of the numerous cases in which the idea of roundness or projecting form is expressed by the figure of striking, w. pwmp, a blow, a round mass; pwmp o ddyn, a lusty fellow.

Pomp. Lat. pompa, a solemn procession.

Pompion.—Pumpkin. Lat. pepo, It. pepone, popone, Lang. poupoun, Fr. pompon, melon, gourd, pumpkin. E. pumpkin seems to be a corruption of pompion, as tompkin or tamkin, the rammer of a gun, of Fr. tampion.

Pond. See Pen.

Ponder. Lat. pondus, -eris, weight; ponderare, to weigh.

-ponent. -pound. Lat. pono, positum, to put, set, lay. Hence compono, to put together, in OE. to compone, or compoune, and thence by corruption to compound, as to pound from the older poune or pun, or as sound from Fr. son. In the same way Expound, Propound.

Poniard. Fr. poignard. It. pugnale, Ptg. punhál, a dagger, probably, as Gr. ἐγχειρίδιον (from χείρ, hand), a hand-knife, from Lat. pugnus, Fr. poing, the fist; empoigner, Ptg. punhar, apunhar, to grasp.

Pontiff. Lat. pontifex, the name given to those appointed to preside over religious rites. In the opinion of Varro, from their having occasion to make and repair the bridge over the Tiber for the performance of sacred rites on the other side. 'Pontifices, ut Q. Scævola Pontifex Maximus dicebat a posse et facere: ego a ponte arbitror, nam ab iis sublicius est factus primum et restitutus sæpe, quod eo sacra et ultrà et cis Tiberim non mediocri ritu fiant.' It is obvious that this explanation is a mere guess, and it has always been felt as a strange origin of the designation. A highly plausible explanation is suggested by F. W. Newman, who supposes that pontifex is for pompifex, the conductor of the pompa or solemn processions, analogous to Gr. πεντε from πειρειν. The Samnite Pontius is the Sabine Pompeius. And pontes occurs in the Iguvine tables with the appearance of signifying pompæ, processions.
Pontoon. Fr. ponton, Lat. pons, pon- tis, a bridge.
* Pony. In Boyer's Dict., 1727, it is marked as a mean or vulgar term, and is explained as ' a little Scotch horse.' The name may then be from Gael. ponaidh, a pony, a docked horse (Macalpine), and not vice versâ. The derivation from puny, insignificant, appears highly im- probable.
Poodle. Du. poedele, to paddle in the water, whence poedel-hond, a poodle or rough water-dog.—Overyssel Almanach. G. pudel-nass, thoroughly wet.
Pooh! An interjection expressive of contempt, originally representing the sound of spitting, from the figure of spit- ting out an ill-tasting morsel.
To-o-h! Tuh! exclaims the Muzunga, spitting with disgust upon the ground.—Burton, Lake Regions of Africa, 2. 246. There's Mackinnons live there. But they are interlopers, they are worthless trash. And he spit in disgust.—Geoffry Hamlyn, 1869. Would to God therefore that we were come to such a detestation and loathing of lying, that we would even spattle at it, and cry fy upon it, and all that use it.—Dent's Pathway.
Sw. spott, spittle, also derision, raillery, contempt, insult. Galla twu! interj. re- presenting sound of spitting; tufa, tufada, to spit, to slight, to scorn. Maori pūwha, Gr. πτύω, Lat. spuere, to spit; respuere, to spit out, to disgust or dislike, to reject, refuse. As sneezing is a convulsive act of spitting, it is taken as expressive of re- jection, and we speak of a thing not to be sneezed at. Bav. pfuchesen, pfugezen, to puff as a short-winded person, spit as a cat, sneeze.
Pool. W. pwll, a pool, pit, ditch; Du. poel, puddle, slough, plash, pool, fen; ON. pollr, a standing water, water-hole. Fin. pula, an opening in the ice. The origin is preserved in Fin. pulata, "to splash, dabble, duck, in aqua moveor cum sonitu, aquam agito. E. dial. pooler, the imple- ment with which tanners stir up the ooze of bark and water in the pits.
Poop. Lat. puppis, Fr. poupe, the hinder part of a ship.
Poor. Lat. pauper, Fr. pauvre, pro- vincially poure; poure homme!—Vocab. de Berri.
Pop. Imitative of the sound made by a small explosion of air; a pop-gun, a tube contrived to drive out a pellet with a pop. Hence to pop, to move suddenly.
Pope. The name of papa, father, was formerly the peculiar address of a bishop, and sometimes was used for the episcopal title; Papa urbis Turonicæ.—Greg. Tur. By a decree of Greg. VII. the title was confined to the Roman Pontiff.—Duc. In the Greek Church the name is still given to a priest. Gr. παπᾶς, Walach. popă, Magy. pap. G. pfaff is a corruption of the same word.
Popinjay. It. papagallo, OFr. pape- gau, papegay, Sp. papagayo, parrot, ety- mologically talking cock. Devon pop- ping, chattering, tattling; Bav. pappeln, to chatter, tattle, talk; der papple, the talker, a parrot. So Sanscr. vach, to speak; vacha, a parrot. The change in the last element from It. gallo, Fr. gau, geau, a cock, to gay, geai, a jay, probably arose from the fact that the jay, being re- markable both for its bright-coloured plumage and chattering voice, seemed to come nearer than the cock to the nature of the parrot.
Poplar. Lat. populus, G. pappel, a tree distinguished by the tremulous move- ment of its leaves. Bav. poppeln, to move about like water in boiling; poppern, to move to and fro, to tremble with anger; pfopfern, to beat as the heart, to palpi- tate.
Poppy. Fr. pavot, pabeau, papou.— Jaubert. Lat. papaver.
Populace. — Popular. — Populous. Lat. populus, W. pobl, people.
Porcellane. China ware seems to have been first made known in Europe to the Italians through the Arabians, who called it, as we now do, China. The name of porcellane, It. porcellana, was in all probability given to it from the re- semblance of the surface to that of various sea-shells, as the Venus' shell or tiger- shell, in It. called porcellana, a name which Rob. Estienne also gives to the buccinum or conch-shell. ' Ung grand os de poisson de mer faict comme ung cor, et duquel l'on peut corner, et en font les graveurs des images, communement dict Porcelaine, buccinum.' Porcelle, the fine scallop or cockleshells that painters use to put their colours in.—Fl. Porcel- lane is mentioned by Marco Polo in the 13th century, long before the intercourse of the Portuguese with the East. He also gives the same name to the cowries which were used as money in India.— Mahn. Etym. Unt. II. The designation of porcellane by the name of the shell early led to the supposition that the

China ware was made of powdered shells.
Porch. Fr. porche, Lat. porticus, as perche from pertica.
Porcupine. It. porco spinoso, Ptg. porco espinho, Venet. porco-spin, a Spiny pig, porcupine, hedgehog. From these was formed E. porpin, a hedgehog (Hal.), and thence corruptly porpentine, the word used by Shakespeare where we now read, Like quills upon the fretful porcupine.
Pore. Fr. pore, Lat. porus, the minute holes in the skin through which the per-spiration oozes out, from Gr. πόρος, a passage.
To Pore. To look close and long. The Sw. uses påla in a similar way; påla hela dagen i en bok, to pore all day over a book. Påla med skrifwande, to be drudging in writing.
Porpesse. It. pesce porco, the hog-fish. Stinking seales and porcpisces.—Spenser.
It is remarkable that while in England the native mereswine, ON. marsvin, sea-swine, has been supplanted by the Latin porpesse, the same change has taken place in France in the opposite direction, and the porpesse is there known by the name of marsouin.
Porphyry. Gr. πορφύρα, purple, πορφυ-ρίνης, red marble.
Porridge.—Porringer. Not the equi-valent of It. porrata, leek-pottage—Fl., from Lat. porrum, a leek, but simply a corruption of pottage, what is boiled in the pot. Fr. potage, pottage, porridge.—Cot. From porridge is formed porringer (as messenger from message), a vessel for holding porridge; more correctly called pottenger in Devonshire. A potenger, or a little dish with eares.—Baret. 1580 in Hal. Pottanger, escuelle.—Palsgr.
Port. Wine of Porto, or Oporto, in Portugal.
Port-, -port. — Portable. — Porter. Lat. porto, -as, Fr. porter, to carry. Hence to import, export, to carry in, out of a country ; portfolio, an implement for holding papers ; portmanteau, &c.
Portcullis. Fr. porte-coulisse, a slid-ing-gate ; coulisse, anything that slides or slips or is let down, from couler, to slide, slip, flow gently, trickle.
The Porte. The Porte or Sublime Porte, the name formerly given to the Ottoman Court, is a perverted Fr. trans-lation of Babi Ali, literally the High Gate, the chief office of the Ottoman government. Bab, a gate, a house of government, official residence, or place of business.—Redhouse. The term is never applied by the Turks to the Sultan or his court, but simply to the premises where the general business of the government is carried on.
Portend. — Portentous. Lat. por-tendo (from porro, onward, in front, and tendo, to stretch), to foreshow ; portentum, a sign of good or ill luck, thence some-thing wonderful, a prodigy.
Porter. A dark kind of beer, origin-ally called porter's beer, implying great strength and substance.
Porthole. G. stikk-pforten, geschütz-pforten, or pfort-gaten, the openings for the artillery in a ship side ; pforte, a door.
Portly. Stately ; Fr. se porter, to carry oneself, to behave.
To Portray. — Portrait. Fr. pour-traire, to draw, delineate ; pourtrait, de-lineation ; traire, Lat. trahere, to draw.
Pose. -pose.—Position.—Positive. Posture. Lat. pono, positum, to put, set down, place, gives positio, a setting, placing, or situation, positura, position, posture, and a very numerous set of com-pounds, as Deposit, Composite, Imposition, Proposition, &c. In the verbs however which correspond to these substantival forms, Fr. déposer, composer, imposer, &c., the place of pono has been surrepti-tiously occupied by derivatives from Lat. pausa, a cessation or rest. Hence Prov. pausa, rest, repose, peace. It. posare, to pause, abide, repose, Ptg. pousar, to stay in the house of some one, to rest, to sit down. Then in an active sense, Prov. pausar, It. posare, Fr. poser, Ptg. pousar, to set down, to place, put, set. Diez quotes from the Alamanic laws, ' et pausant arma sua josum.' ' Elhs lo van pausar en .i. bel lieyt :' they lay him in a fine bed. ' Ar o pauzem aissi :' now let us suppose it so.—Rayn. From this source came, in-dependent of any Latin original, Prov. ripausar. It. riposare, Fr. reposer, to rest, repose, while the compounds expausar, depausar, empausar, &c., Fr. exposer, dé-poser, &c., took the place of Lat. expono, depono, impono, &c.
To Pose. — Appose. Fr. apposer, to lay, or set, on, or near to.—Cot. Then he apposed to them his last left roste. Chapman, Homer. To pose or appose were then used in the sense of putting to a person specific points on which an answer was expected, of subjecting to examination, and an ap-

A pposite answer is an answer on the points put to one.
And often coming from school, when I met her, she would appose me touching my learning and lesson.—Stow in R. She pretended at the first to pose him and sift him, thereby to try whether he were indeed the very Duke of York or no.—Bacon, H. VII. in R.
The exercises of the students written for examinations at St Paul's school are still called appositions. The term is then specially applied to the case in which the person examined is unable to answer, when pose or appose takes the meaning of putting to a nonplus.
And canst thou be other than apposed with the question of that Jew who asked whether it were more possible to make a man's body of water or of earth? All things are alike easie to an infinite power.—Bp Hall in R.
Posnet. A pipkin. Probably a dim. of pot. Posnet, a lytell potte.—Palsgr. Olle in Necham is glossed poz urceoli, pocenet. Urceos, in John de Garlandia, in one MS. pos, in another pocenez.—Scheler.
Possess. Lat. possideo, possessum, from potis sedeo, I sit as master or wield-er; as possum from potis sum, I am master, I have in my power. Sanscr. pati, a master, owner, lord. Lat. potior, -itus, to have in possession, to get the upper hand.
Possible. — Potent, -potent. Lat. possum, I am able, pcpl. potens, -entis. See Possess.
Post. I. Lat. postis, a doorpost, the fixed upright on which the door is hung. Perhaps from positus, set, laid; positus, -us, the site of a thing.
2. It. posta, from positus, a set place or station, the post or appointed place where a sentinel must stand; the posture or standing of a man, the stake set on a game; also a station or place where relays of horses are kept for the public service. Posta seems also to have been used for an entry in a book of account, whence our expression to post up an account. 'Ubi vero per postas libri usurarii non apparuerit per petentem sibi usuras restitui.'—Concil. Ravennense, A.D. 1317, in Duc.
Post-. Posterity. Lat. post, after, afterward; posteri, those that come after, descendants, posterity.
Postern. Posterne, yate, posticum, posterula.—Pr. Pm. Fr. posterne, po-terne, It. posterla, explained by Muratori as a corruption of posterula for porterula, a little gate. But posterula is also used in the sense of a back way. 'Viator quidam ad citeriora festinans cum bivium armato milite vidisset oppletum, per posterulam tramitem medium squalentem fructetis et sentibus vitabundus excedens in Armenios incidit fessos.'—Ammianus in Duc. In general, however, it is used for back door, and like posticium, which was used in the same sense, is a derivation from post, behind.
Postulate. Lat. postulo, to demand from posco, poscitum (pos'tum), to ask for, require, demand.
Posy. A motto or device, an inscription on a ring or the like. From poesy.
A paltry ring whose posy was For all the world like cutlers' poetry Upon a knife. Love me and leave me not. Shakesp.
Udal writes it poisee—'There was also a superscription or poisee written on th' toppe of the crosse—This is the King o' the Jews.'—Luke c. 23.
A nosegay was probably called by this name from flowers being used emblematically, as is still common in the East. Among the tracts mentioned in Catal. Heber's MSS. No. 1442, is 'A new yeare guifte, or a posie made upon certen flower presented to the Countess of Pembroke By the Author of Chloris, &c.'—N. and Q., Dec. 19, 1868.
Then took he up his garland and did shew What every flower, as country people hold, Did signify, and how, ordered thus Expressed his grief.—B. & F., Philaster I. i.
There's rosemary, that's for remembrance—pray, love, remember; and there's pansies, that's for thoughts.—Hamlet.
Pot. ON. pottr, Lith. pudas, Fin. pata. Fr. pot.
The expression to go to pot is probably to be explained from Sw. dial. putt, pit hell. Far te putten! go to hell. H. gikk a pyttes, it went to pot, turned out fruitless.
Potable. Gr. πίνω, πεπωκα, from root πο-, to drink; πῖνον, Lat. potio, drink; potare, to drink.
Potash. The salt obtained from boiling wood ashes in a pot or kettle.
Potatoe. From the name by which the root was known in Haiti. Peter Martyr, speaking of Haiti, says (in Decad. 2, c. 9), 'Effodiunt etiam e tellure suapte natura nascentes radices, indigenæ Batatas appellant, quas ut vidi insubres napos existimavi, aut magna terræ tubera.
From this last expression sprang It. tartufalo and G. kartoffel. Navagerio, who was in the Indies, at the same time, writes in 1526, 'Io ho vedute molte cose del

Indie ed ho avuto di quelle radice che chiamano batatas, e le ho mangiate : sono di sapor di castagno.' Doubtless these were sweet potatoes or yams, which are still known by this name in Spanish.
Potent. See Possible.
Pother. See Pudder.
To Potter. To stir or disorder any-thing.—B. ; to poke, push, as with the end of a stick, to do things ineffectually.—Craven Gl. Du. poteren, peuteren, to pick one's nose or teeth, to finger. The notion of trifling or ineffectual action is often expressed by the figure of picking, or stirring with a pointed implement. So Norm, diguer, to prick, digonner, to work slowly.—Decorde. To piddle, or work in a trifling manner, is properly to pick with the fingers. The simple form of the verb of which potter is a frequentative is seen in E. dial. poit or pote, to poke, Sw. pâta, peta, to poke or pick. Pl.D. pöotern, to stir (herumwühlen) with an instrument in something. If the instrument is pointed the word is pöokern.—Danneil.
Pottle. A measure of two quarts. Fr. potel, little pot ; measure of a demi-setier or other small measure.—Roquef.
Pouch. See Pocket.
Poultice. Lat. puls, pultis, pulticula, It. polta, poltiglia, pottage, gruel, pap. Gr. πόλτος, πύλφος, porridge. The form poultice, poultis, corresponds to a Lat. pulticius. See Putty.
Poultry.—Pullet. Fr. poule, a hen; poulet, a chicken, from Lat. pullus, the young of an animal, as a chicken or a foal.
Pounce. 1. Powder for smoothing parchment for writing on, for which pur-pose pumice was formerly used. Fr. pierre ponce, from It. pómice, a pumice-stone ; poncer, to smooth, rub over with a pumice-stone.
2. The talon of a bird of prey. Sp. puncha, thorn, prick ; pinchar, pinzar, to prick, sting. To pounce upon an object is to dash down upon it like a bird of prey, to seize it with his pounces.
Pound. 1. Du. pond, G. pfund; Lat. pondo, in weight, in pounds as the unit of weight.
Pound. 2.—To Pound. Pound, the inclosure for straying cattle. See Pen.
To Pound. AS. punian, OE. to pun. To stamp or punne in a morter.—Fl.
To Pour. An initial p in an English word occasionally corresponds to ch in Sp., as in E. poll and Sp. cholla, the top of the head. To pour may thus be the equivalent of Sp. chorrear, to gush, to pour; chorro, a strong and coarse sound emitted by the mouth, a gush of water.
The word is however by some identified with W. bwrw, to cast or throw; bwrw gwlaw, to rain ; bwrw dagrau, to shed tears.
To Pout. Lang. pout, pot, Lim. poto, a lip ; fa las potas, Genevese faire la potte, to stick out the lips in ill humour, to pout. Serv. putyenie, thrusting out the lip in discontent ; putyitise, to pout.
The origin is the interjection of con-tempt and displeasure, prut! prut! trut! tut! ON. putt! Fr.Fland. put! putte! representing a blurt of the mouth with the protruded lips. Magy. pittyni, pitty-egetni, pittyentni, to blurt with the lips ; pittyasz, one who has prominent lips ; pittyesztni, to hang the lips, to pout ; pittyedni (of the lips), to project.
In like manner from the form prut! may be explained G. protzen, prutzen, to sulk, and OHG. prort, a lip ; from tut! E. tutty, ill-tempered, sullen, and tut-mouth-ed, having a projecting mouth ; from trut! G. trotzen, to pout or sulk, to huff, and Sw. trut, snout, chops.
Powder. Fr. poudre, from Lat. pulver; dust (pol're, poldre, poudre), as soudre from solvere, moudre from molere.
Power. Fr. pouvoir, OFr. pooir. It. potere, an infinitive formed by analogy from the inflections potes, potest, as It., volere, Fr. vouloir, from volo, volumus, &c.
Practice.—Pragmatic. Gr. πράσσω, -έω, to do, work, behave, deal ; πρακτικός, business-like ; πρᾶγμα, what is done, a thing, business ; πραγματικός, Lat. pragmaticus, busy, skilled in state affairs or in law ; pragmatica sanctio, constitutio, &c., what was done by the emperors in council. Pragmatical, busy, officious, meddlesome.
Prairie. Fr. prairie, L.Lat. prataria, from pratum, a meadow.
Praise.—Prize. Lat. pretium. It. pretio, prezzo, pregio, Fr. prix, price; Du. prijs, price, worth, value, also praise, or the attribution of a high value, also prize, or the reward of success. Sp. prez, honour or glory gained by some meritorious action. Fr. prix, price, value, prize, reward ; priser, to set a price on ; Du. priisen, to appraise, to praise.
Prank.—Prance. To prank, to set off, trick or trim—B. ; to set out for show.
They which are with God and gather with him goeth not pranking afore God, but meekly cometh after.—Bale, Ap. in R.

G. prangen, to glitter, strike the eye with outward show; mit kleidern prangen, to prank up oneself, go costly. Prange nicht vor dem könige, put not forth thyself in the presence of the king. Prangepferd, Du. pronkpaard, a horse of state, horse for show. G. prangen, Du. pronk, ostentation, finery. Te pronk stellen, to show off; te pronk staan, to be exposed to view, to stand in the pillory. Pronken, to make a fine show, to strut.
A prank is commonly taken in a bad sense, and signifies something done in the face of others that makes them stare with amazement.
In Venice they do let heaven see the pranks they dare not show their husbands.—Othello.
The link between prank and prance is found in Bav. prangezen, prangssen, to make compliments, assume airs; prangss, ziererei, idle ceremony. Da. dial. pranje, prandse, to strut, prance. Swiss spranzen, to strut.
The word may be regarded as a nasalised form of Fr. braguer, to flaunt, brave, brag, or jet it; braguerie, wanton tricking or pranking, bragging, swaggering. See Brag. From the same root (prag or brak, crack) may be traced G. prahlen, to cry, speak loud, to glitter, strike the sight, to brag, boast, make parade; Swiss brogeln, progeln, to strut, swagger.

To Prate.—Prattle. Sw. prata, Du. praaten, Pl.D. praten, prateln, G. praten, prätschen (D. M. 4. 236), pratten, prätzeln (Sanders), Swiss pradeln, braudeln, brudeln, brodschen, bruscheln, Swab. bratscheln, to prate, tattle; Pl.D. braodschen, to talk loud; E. dial. pross, chat; Sw. dial. patra, padra, to prate, chatter; Serv. prtljati, to prattle.
The sense of idle or excessive talk is commonly expressed by the figure of broken sound, as we call a great talker, a rattle, a clack. On this principle the forms above collected take their rise in slightly varying representations of inarticulate sound. G. pratsch! represents the sound of water dashed down (Sanders); prasseln, prasteln, pratzeln, spratzen, to crackle, rustle (Sand.), protzeln, rauschen (D. M. 4. 132, 300), Du. preutelen, protelen, to simmer, murmur (Kil.), Sw. dial. pruttla, to boil hard, bubble up.

Prawn. From the formidable spur with which the head is armed. AS. preon, bodkin. NFris. porn, It. parnocchia, prawn.

To Pray. Lat. precari. It. pregare, Fr. prier.

Pre-. Lat. præ, in front; as in Precinct, Precise, &c.
To Preach. Lat. prædicare, to announce, proclaim; Sp. predicar, G. predigen, ON. predika, Sw. preika, Fr. prescher, pricher, to preach.
Preamble. Fr. preambule; Lat. præambulare, to go before.
Prebend. See Provender.
-prec-. —Precarious. Lat. preces, prayers; precor, -catus sum, to pray; deprecor, to deprecate or pray against; imprecor, to imprecate or invoke upon. Also Lat. precarius, E. precarious, granted on entreaty, held at the pleasure of another, and so, unreliable, uncertain.
Precept. Lat. præcipio, -ceptum, to instruct. See -cept.
Precious. Lat. pretium, a price; prætiosus, Fr. precieux, costly.
Precipice.—Precipitate. Lat. præceps (from præ and caput, head), head foremost, headlong, steep, rash; præcipito, to fling or run down with violence, to hurry.
Precocious. Lat. coquo, to cook, to ripen; præcox, early ripe.
Predaceous.—Predatory. See Prey.
Predial. Lat. prædium, a farm.
Preface. Lat. fari, to speak; præfatio, something spoken before.
Pregnant. Lat. prægnans, in the state previous to giving birth to a child. From the root gen exhibited in Gr. γεννάω, to beget, produce, and implicitly in Lat. nascor, natus (for gnascor, genascor, to be born.
-prehend. — Prehensile. Lat. præhendo, præhensum, to grasp; apprehendo, to lay hold of, to understand; comprehendo, to hold, to comprise, to understand.
Prelate. Lat. præfero, prælatus, advanced before the rest.
Preliminary. Lat. limen, a threshold.
Premises. Lat. præmissa, things spoken of or rehearsed before. Then from the use of the term in legal language, where the appurtenances of a thing sold are mentioned at full in the first place, and subsequently referred to as the premises, the word has come to signify the appurtenances of a house, the adjoining land, and generally the whole inclosure of a property.
Premium. Lat. præmium, a reward.
Prentice. For apprentice, Fr. apprentis, from apprendre, to learn.
Preposterous. Lat. præposterus, the wrong end first; præ, before, in front, posterus, behind.

Prerogative. The tribes that were asked to give the first vote at the election of the Roman magistrates were called prærogativæ (rogo, to ask); whence prærogativa, precedency; pre-eminence.
Presage. See Sagacious.
Presbyter. Gr. πρεσβύτερος, comp. of πρέσβυς, an aged man.
Present. Lat. præsens, præ esens, being before, from esum, the primitive form of sum, I am.
Press, -press. Lat. premo, pressum. As in Express, Compress, &c. To Press for a soldier.—Press-gang. From Lat. præsto, in readiness, to give money in prest was to give money in hand to be subsequently accounted for.
And he sent thyder three somers (baggage horses) laden with nobles of Castel and floreyns, to gyve in prest to knyghts and squyers, for he knewe well otherwyse he sholde not have them come out of theyr houses. — Berners, Froissart in R. Hence prest-money, corruptly press-money, the ernest money received by a soldier taking service.
I never yet did take press-money to serve under anyone.—Cartwright in R. As we have all received our press-money in baptism, so we must every one according to our engagement maintain the fight against the world.—Bp Hall in R.
Hence to prest, or press, to engage soldiers. To press soldiers, soldaten werben, conscribere, colligere milites.—Minsheu.
At a later period the practice of taking men for the public service by compulsion made the word be understood as if it signified to force men into the service, and the original reference to ernest money was quite lost sight of.
Preter-. Lat. præter, beyond.
Pretext. Lat. prætexo, prætextum, to cover over, overspread, to cloke, excuse, pretend.
Pretty. Dapyr or pratie, elegans.—Pr. Pm. The analogies usually suggested are not satisfactory. There is too great a difference in meaning to allow us to regard the word as the equivalent of G. prächtig, stately, splendid. Nor does It. pretto, pure, unmixed, give a much better explanation. The radical meaning seems to be that of Fr. piquant, agreeably provoking, making a strong impression on our taste; qui plait, qui touche extremement; beauté piquante.—Gattel.
It is shown under Proud that the blurt of the mouth expressive of defiance is represented by the interjections trut! prut! from the former of which are formed G. trotzen, to pout like a child, to defy; Bav. trätzen, to provoke one, lacessere, irritare; then (as G. reizend, charming, from reizen, to irritate, provoke, charm), trutzig (nett, zierlich, artig, mignon), pretty.
In like manner, from the interjection prut! are formed G. protzen, to sulk; protzig, insolent, saucy; Du. pratten, superbire, ferocire.—Kil. From the notion of insulting we readily pass to that of irritating, provoking, and thus the E. praty, pretty, the equivalent of G. protzig, would acquire its actual signification in the same way as has been shown in the case of Bav. trutzig.
Thus spurred and rendered desperate by the irresistibly provocative prettiness of Catherina.—Trollope, Marietta, 2. 55.
It is a strong confirmation of the foregoing derivation that it enables us to explain a meaning of pretty apparently at total variance with the common one; pretty, crafty.—Hal. ON. pretta, to deceive, It. pratta, Sc. prat, prot, a trick.
The notion of provoking or teasing naturally leads to that of playing tricks upon one, then deceiving him.
Prevaricate. Lat. prævaricari; a term of Roman law, to act dishonestly in a cause, to promote the interest of the side for which you are engaged, to shuffle, to work by collusion in pleading, properly to walk crookedly. Varus, crooked, awry.
Prey. Lat. præda, Bret. preiz, Fr. proie. The original meaning is shown in W. praidd, a flock or herd, prey taken in war, which in early times would consist mainly of cattle. Gael. spreidh, cattle; Sc. spreith, prey, plunder. 'A party of Camerons had come down to carry a spreith of cattle, as it was called, from Moray.'—Abernethy.
Thai folk were all that nycht sprethand, Thai made all thairis that thai fand. Wyntown.
Price. Lat. pretium, W. prid, Bret. priz, Fr. prix.
Prick.—Prickle. Du. prik, a prick or stab; W. pric, a skewer; Ptg. prego, a tack or small nail, the sharp horn of a young deer; pregar, to nail, fix, stick. Sw. prick, point, spot; prickig, spotted. Pl.D. prikken, prikkeln, prokeln, to pick, stick; anprikken, to stimulate, set on. W. procio, to thrust, to stick in. Gael. brog, to goad, to spur; Fr. broche, a spit; brocher, to stitch.
To Prick. To prick along is probably not from spurring the horse but moving sharply forwards. 'I pycke me forthe out of a place, or I pycke me hence: je me tire avant.'—Palsgr.

Priest. OFr. prestre, Lat. presbyter, from Gr. πρεσβύτερος, elder.

Prim. The word seems to represent the pursing up the mouth of a person, keeping a careful watch on their words. On the same principle is formed Sc. mim, prim, demure, prudish.— Jam.
'The peer pridefu' body cam mimmin' an' primpin' ben the fleer.'—Banff, dial.
Sc. primp, to deck oneself out in a stiff and affected manner; primpit, stiff in dress and demeanour; primsie, demure, precise. It may probably be the latter word which was intended by 'the prenzie Angelo,' in Measure for Measure. Isabella has just been speaking of the 'outward-sainted deputy,' and his 'settled visage.'

Prime.—Primary.—Primate.—Primitive. Lat. præ, in front, before; prior, former; primus, first, as Gr. πρό, πρότερος, πρῶτος. Lith. pirm, before, pirmjaus, sooner, rather; pirmas, the first. Gr. πρίν, before.

To Prime. The priming of a gun is the last dressing or trimming which fits it for immediate service. To prime, to trim up young trees.—Forby. A priming-iron, a pruning-knife.—Minsheu. The original meaning of prune is to dress or set in order, and the priming of a gun was called pruning. It. granita polvere, corn-powder, pruning, or touch powder.—Fl. See Prune.

Primrose. Prymerose, primula.—Pr. Pm. Lat. primula veris, Fr. primevere, the earliest conspicuous flower of spring. The element rose is added in the E. name as the type of flower in general.

Prince.—Principal.—Principle. It. principe, prince, prence, Lat. princeps, prince, leader, beginner, chief; principium, beginning, first taking; from capio and the element prim or prin, before. Lith. pirm, before; pirmgalas, forepart; pirmgimys, first-born. See Prime.

Print. Prænte, effigies, impressio.—Pr. Pm. It. imprenta, Fr. empreinte, print, stamp, impression.—Cot. Empreindre, from Lat. imprimere, as craindre from tremere, geindre from gemere.

Prior. See Prime.

Prise. Lat. prehendere, Fr. prendre, to take; pris, taken; prise, a taking. So from Lat. apprehendere, Fr. apprendre, appris, to learn, to teach, and thence E. apprise, to make known to one. So also Fr. comprendre, compris, E. to comprise, or contain; Fr. entreprendre, -pris, to undertake, E. enterprise, an undertaking.

To Prise. To prise a box open is to force it open by leverage, from Fr. prise, a taking, seizing, any advantage—Cot., what enables one to hold, a purchase in nautical language. Manx prise, a fulcrum; as a verb, to raise by lever on a fulcrum.—Cregeen. On the other hand in Wiltshire to brise is to use force. If one wants an overfull box to shut, the direction is to brise upon it.—N. and Q., September 3, 1870.

Prism. Gr. πρίω, to saw; πρίσμα, anything sawed, sawdust, a geometrical prism.

Prison. It. prigione, Fr. prison, from Lat. prehensio, prensio, seizure. Sp. prisión, seizure, capture, confinement, prison, prisoner. In OE. also prison was commonly used for prisoner.

Pristine. Lat. pristinus, ancient, belonging to former times. See Prime.

Private, -prive. Lat. privus, separate, single, particular, one's own; privo, to take away, to deprive; privatus, deprived of, also appropriated, peculiar, one's own.

Privilege. Lat. privilegium, a law affecting particular persons, a private law.

Prize. Two words seem to have been confounded. 1. from Lat. pretium, Fr. prix, the price, value, worth of things, also the prize, reward, or honour due to the best deserver in a jousts, &c.—Cot., and 2. Fr. prise, a taking, seizing, booty, or prize. De bonne prise, good or lawful prize, also full ripe, fit to be cropped, gathered, or taken.—Cot. Et s'ils priegnent riens des enemys de roy ou d'autres quiconques, qu'ils tielment feront amener en le dit port, et ent ferront pleine information à dit conservator.—Stat. 2 H. V., c. 6.

Pro-. Gr. πρό, before. Lat. pro, for, before, in comp. in place of, for, as pronoun, what stands for a noun.

Probable.—Probate.—Probity. Lat. probus, good; probo, to make good, to deem good or approve. See To Prove.

Probe. Cat. proba, Fr. éprouvette, an instrument of surgery to try the depth of a wound, from Lat. probare, to try. Prov. prova, a probe, a sounding-line. The Sp. name of the implement is tienta, from Lat. tentare, to try.

Problem. Gr. πρόβλημα; πρό, in front, βάλλω, to cast.

Procrastinate. Lat. procrastinare; to put off to the morrow; cras, to-morrow; crastinus, belonging to the morrow.

Proctor. See Proxy.

Prodigal. Lat. prodigus, from prodigo, to lavish.
Prodigy. Lat. prodigium, a thing monstrous.
Profane. Lat. profanus; pro, away from, and fanum, a temple, fane.
Profile. It. porfilo, a border in arm-oury, a purfle or worked edge, a profile; also used for the superficies or surface of anything.—Fl. Fr. pourfil, a man's out-ward lineaments, the middle line of his face.—Cot. Properly the outline of the face. It. filo, line, edge.
Profit. Lat. proficio, -fectum, to help on, further, advantage, to proceed or go forward; profectus, It. profetto, Fr. profit, profit, advantage, increase.
Profligate. Lat. fligo, to dash down; profligo, to put to flight, to ruin ; profligatus, ruined, debauched, wicked.
Profound. Lat. profundus, deep, having the bottom (fundus) far down.
Prog. Prog is what is got by prog-ging, as the provisions in a beggar's bag, and is thence applied to victuals taken to be consumed on a journey or the like. While spouse tucked up does in her pattens trudge it, With handkerchief of prog like trull with budget. Congreve in R.
To Prog. To use all endeavours to get or gain.—B. Da. prakke, to get by importunity. At prakke sig frem i wer-den, to get on in the world by hook or by crook. Prakker, a beggar. N. prakka, to scrape together, to molest ; prakkar, a miser, a pedlar. Sw. pracka, to make shifts, to shuffle, to beg. Pracka tilsam-man, to scrape together, get by hook or by crook ; pracka pa, to fob off; pracka ihop nagot, to patch up a piece of busi-ness. Prack, meanness, huckstering, beggary, bungling; prackare, a vagabond, beggar, broker, huckster, bungler. Du. pragchen, prachen, to gain by sordid means, to scrape up, to cheat, to beg ; pracher, a niggard, usurer, miser, beggar. There can be little doubt that the foregoing are identical with E. prag, prog.
O neighbours, neighbours, first get coyne Firste hardlye pragge the purse.—Drant, Horace.
He married a light huswife who stealing that money which for many years before he had been scraping together by his progning and necessitous tricks and shifts.—Wood, Ath. Oxon. in R. A progning knave.—B. and F.
The word is commonly referred to Lat. procurator, an attorney or proctor, a per-son a main part of whose business con-sisted in calling in money, and recovering dues of a more or less oppressive nature.

PROP He was thus a very unpopular character, and was made the type of discreditable dealing.
The fogging proctorage of money. Milton in Worcester.
It would seem that the OE. contractions proketor, prokecy, for procurator, procu-racy, and Gael, procadair, a law agent, pracadair, a collector of tythes, procadair-eachd, advocacy, pleading, importunity, might vulgarly have been felt as if de-rived from a root, prock or prack, to ad-vocate, to importune. And thus we may explain OE. prokkyn, or styffly askyn, procor, procito—Pr. Pm., as well perhaps as Sc. prig, to importune, to haggle. Gael, (locally) prac, small tithes, dues.
Prolific. Lat. proles, offspring.
Prolix. Lat. prolixus (explained from pro and laxus, slack), long, lengthened, tedious.
Promenade. Fr. mener, to lead, to move; promener, to walk, to lead out. Je le pourmenerai, I will keep him stir-ring, will find him work enough.—Cot. Se promener, to go out for pleasure or exercise ; promenade, a walk. Lat. mino, to drive cattle. ' Prominare jumenta ad lacum.'—Appian.
Promiscuous. Lat. promiscuus; pro, and misceo, to mingle.
Promontory. Lat. promontorium; pro, in front, mons, a mountain.
Prompt. Lat. promo, promptum, to draw forth, bring out, lay open; promptus, drawn forth, ready.
Promulgate. Lat. promulgare, to publish abroad, explained as if provul-gare, from vulgus, the people ; to lay be-fore the public.
Prone. Lat. pronus, bending forward, inclined.
Prong. The point of a fork, in the S. of E. a pitchfork. Prongstele, the handle of a hay-fork.—Hal. From prog, synony-mous with prod, to prick. Sussex sprong, spronk, stump of a tree or of a tooth.
Prop. Sw. propp, a bung, stopper, cork, wadding ; proppa, to stop, ram, cram ; Du. prop, proppe, a stopper, also a support ; proppen, to cram, to support.—Kil. Piedm. broba, bropa, a vine prop, stake for supporting vines. Walach. proptea, a prop, support ; propti, to prop, to lean on. The radical meaning seems to be pre-served in E. brob, to prick with a bodkin—Hal., a parallel form with prod or brod. From the notion of pricking we pass to that of thrusting in, cramming, or to that of thrusting upwards, supporting. Compare Lang, pounchar, to prick or sting; pounche, Fr. pointal, a support, prop. It. puntare, to prick, puntello, a prop.

Propagate. Lat. propago, to spread as a tree at the top, to multiply and increase; propago, -inis, a vinestock cut down for the sake of shooting out afresh, a shoot or cutting, a race, stock, or lineage.

Proper.—Proprietor. Lat. proprius, one's own.

Prophet. Gr. προφήτης ; πρὸ, before-hand, φημί, to say, speak.

Propinquity. Lat. prope, near by; propinquus, near at hand, neighbouring.

Propitious. Lat. propitius, favour-able to.

Prose. Lat. prosa, simple discourse, opposed to metre. Explained from prorsus (pro-versus), straight.

Proselyte. Gr. προσήλυτος, from προσ-έρχομαι, -ῆλθον, to come over to.

Prosody. Gr. προσῳδία ; πρὸς and ᾠδή, a singing.

Prosper.—Prosperous. Lat. prosper, fortunate ; Gr. προσφέρω, to bring to, to add ; πρόσφορος, serviceable, profitable.

Prostrate. Lat. sterno, stratum, to strew or spread ; prosterno, to lay flat, to cast down.

Proto-. Gr. πρὸ, before ; comp. πρό-τερος, earlier ; superl. πρῶτος (for πρώτατος, πρῶτος), first.

Protocol. Fr. protocole, Gr. πρωτό-κολλου, a Byzantine term applied to the first sheet pasted on a MS. roll, stating by whom it was written, &c. Subsequently applied to notarial writings. Gr. κολλάω, to glue, paste.

Protuberant. Lat. protuberare; pro, before, and tuber, a swelling.

Proud.—Pride. The blurt of the mouth expressive of contempt or de-fiance is represented by the interjections Ptrot ! Prut ! Trut ! Putt ! Tut ! Twish ! some of which forms have been retained in one of the European languages and some in another. OE. pirot! scornful word, or trut! vath !—Pr. Pm. Prut ! ON. putt! interjection of contempt ; Fr. trut! tush, tut, fy man ; trut avant ! a fig's end, on afore for shame.—Cot. From the form trut the G. has trotz, scorn, bravado, arrogance ; einem trotz bieten, to defy one ; das kind trotzt, the child pouts, is sullen ; trotzig, huffing, swag-gering, proud, insolent. In like manner, the form prut produces protzen, to show ill-will or displeasure by a surly silence (to pout) ; protzig, insolent, snappish, saucy—Küttn. ; Hesse, brotzen, to pout or thrust out the lips from ill-will ; brotze, brotzmaul, prutsche, a pouting mouth, projected lips ; brüüd, prüüts, prüütsch, Swiss brütsch, Du. prootsch, preutsch, proud ; pratten, to pout ; prat, proud, arrogant ; Pl.D. prott, apt to give short and surly answers.—Danneil. OE. pruie, proud.

The Manuel des Pecchés treating of Pride takes as first example him who defies the reproofs of his spiritual father, and says Prut ! for thy cursyng, prest.—1. 3016.

ON. atprutta á hesta, to pop to a horse to make it go faster. The different forms of the interjection representing a blurt with the lips may be compared with Magy. ptrusz, prusz, trüsz, W. tis, sneeze.

We say that a thing is not to be sneezed at, meaning that it is not to be despised.

-prove.—Prove.—Proof. Lat. probus, good ; probo, to make good, to show the soundness of a thing, to prove, also to find good, to approve ; also, as It. pro-vare, to try, to use means that must make manifest the goodness or deficiency of a thing. Reprobo, Fr. reprouver, to reject on trial, to find bad, to reprove or reproach one with his fault. To improve, to make better.

Provender.—Prebend. Lat. præ-benda, -orum (from præbeo for præ-hibeo, to hold forth, supply, provide), the ration or allowance of food for a soldier, was applied to the allowances for monks and canons in monasteries. ' Centum clericis pauperibus præbendam panis, piscis et vini concedebat.' ' Fratres amavit, præ-bendam auxit.'—Duc. The word became in Fr. provende, and corruptly provendre (whence E. provender), a ration of food either for man or beast. Provendre, benefice ecclesiastique.—Roquef. Se il ne s'en amende—manjust sols et perde sa provende de vin, jusqu' alors qu'il ait fait satisfaction et amende.—Regle de St Bernard in Roquef. Du. provende, provisions.

In process of time the term was appro-priated to the benefices of the canons or dignitaries of a cathedral. ' Et in Remensi, Cameracensi et Leodiensi ecclesiis be-neficia quæ vulgo præbenda dicuntur ob-tinuit.'—Duc.

Province. Lat. provincia.

Provost. OFr. provost, G. probst. From Lat. præpositus, set before.

Prow. Lat. prora. It. proda, Fr. proue, the fore part of a ship. Pol. przod, fore part ; przod okretu, front of ship, prow. Naprzod ! forwards !

Prowess. Lat. probus, good, sound, became Cat. prous, Prov. pros, good for its purpose, Fr. preux, valiant, loyal, worthy, discreet, ready.—Cot. Adverbially prou, much, greatly, enough.—Cot. Cat. pro batre alcun, probé percutere aliquem.—Diez. It. buon pro vi faccia, Fr. bon prou leur face, much good may it do them. OE. prow, profit, advantage. In long abydyng is full lytyl prow.—MS. in Hal.

The general quality of goodness is typified by valour in a man and virtue in a woman. Preud' homme (Mid. Lat. pro-bus. homo), a valiant, faithful, discreet man ; preude femme, a chaste, honest, modest, discreet matron.—Cot.

Las donas eissamen an pretz diversamens, Las unas de belleza, las autras de proeza : thus women also have different excellencies, some in beauty, and others in virtue.—Rayn.

But reference being commonly made to the quality as exhibited in men, Fr. prouesse. It. prodezza (with an intrusive d to prevent hiatus, as in Lat. prodest, prodesse), Prov. proheza, is, prowess, came in general to signify valour or valorous deeds.

Præfatus heros post infinitas probitates. Orderic. Vit. in Duc.

* To Prowl.—Proll. The derivation from a supposed Fr. proieler, to seek one's prey, is extremely doubtful. The older way of spelling is proll, and even purl, in Pr. Pm. I prolle, I go here and there to seke a thynge, je tracasse.—Palsgr.

Though ye prolle aye, ye shall it never find. Chaucer.

Proximate. Lat. prope, near; comp. propior; superl. proximus (for propsi-mus), nearest.

Proxy. Lat. procurator, an advocate or attorney, was cut down in Sc. to pro-cutor, and in E. to prokeior, proctor; and procuratio, Du. prokuratie, an authority or warrant of attorney, was curtailed in like manner to prokecy, proxy. Proke-toure, procurator ; prokecye, procuratio.—Pr. Pm.

* Prude. Properly a woman who keeps men at a distance, treats their offers with contempt; a proud girl. Du. preutsch, prootsch, proud ; een preutsch meisje, a prude ; preutschheid, prudery'.—Bomhoff. Swiss brutsch, stolz, sprode, proud, cold, disdainful. Compare ein sprödes mädchen, a shy, coy, or capricious girl, a prude.—Küttn.

Prudent. Lat. prudens, contr. from providens.

To Prune.—Proin. To prune or proin is for a bird to dress her feathers with her beak.

Skartis (cormorants) with thair bekkis Forgane the sun gladly thaym prunyeis and bekis. D. V. 131. 45.

The signification, however, is not confined to the case of a bird, but is extended to the notion of dressing or trimming in general.

I wald me prein plesandlie in precious wedis. Dunbar.

A special application of this idea gives the ordinary sense of prune, to dress or trim trees. The priming or pruning of a gun (as it was formerly called) must be understood as the dressing or trimming of the implement, giving it the last touch necessary to fit it for immediate service. The origin seems to be ON. prjon, Sc. preen, prin, a pin or knitting-needle, from the notion of picking or arranging nicely with a pointed implement.

He kembeth him, he proineth him and piketh. Merch. Tale.

Fr. eschargotter, to prune a tree, to pick any thing round about.—Cot. So also Sc. prink, signifying to prick, is also used in the sense of decking. Prinked (Ex-moor), well-dressed, fine, neat.—Grose.

They who prink and pamper the body, and neglect the soul.—Howell in Todd.

To pick, to dress out finely.—Hal. Prick-medainty, one who dresses in a finical manner.—Jam.

On the same principle Du. priem, a pin or bodkin, seems to be the origin of prime, to prune or dress trees. To prime, to trim up young trees.—Forby. Prim-ing-iron, as pruning-iron, a knife for pruning.—Minsheu. A person carefully dressed is said to be tiré à quatre épingles.

Prurient. Lat. prurio, to itch, to feel strong desire.

To Pry. To peep. I pike or prie, je pipe hors.—Palsgr. Perhaps identical with Sc. prieve, preif, pree, to prove, taste, try.

Nae honey beik that ever I did pree Did taste so sweet and smervy unto me. Ross's Helenore.

Possibly however it may be a modifica-tion of OE. pire or peer, to peep.

Psalm.—Psaltery. Gr. ψαλμός, from ψάλλω, to play on a stringed instrument, whence ψαλτήριον, an instrument of that description.

Pseudonym. Gr. ψευδώνυμος, falsely named; ψευδός, a lie, and ὄνομα, a name.
Psha.—Pshaw. The interjections pish! and psha! are different ways of articulating the sound sh, by introducing a vowel between the consonantal sounds in the one case, and subsequent to both in the other. See Pish.
Puberty.—Pubescence. Lat. pubes, the signs of manhood, the hair that grows on the body at the approach of manhood; pubertas, youth. Pubescence (bot.), down on plants.
Public.—Publican.—Publish. Lat. publicus (from populus, people), belonging to the people; publico, Fr. publier, to publish or make public.
Puce. Flea-coloured; Fr. puce, It. pulce, Lat. pulex, pulicis, a flea.
Puck. See Pug.
Pucker. To pucker is to make pokes, to bag. Fr. poche, the pucker or bagging of an ill-cut garment.—Cot. It. saccola, saccoccia, a pouch, pocket, also any puckering or crumpling in clothes; saccolare, to bag, to pucker.—Fl.
Pudder.—Podder.—Pother. Disturbance, confusion, confused noise; to pudder, pother, to confound, perplex. The image immediately suggested by the word is a thickness of the air impeding the sight and damping the vital powers, from whence the signification is extended to the confusion of the hearing and understanding by the conflict of sounds.
—Such a smoke As ready was them all to choke, So grievous was his pother.—Drayton.
They were able enough to lay the dust and pudder in antiquity which he and his are apt to raise.—Milton.
The resemblance to powder is merely accidental, and pudder is probably a parallel form with Da. pludre, E. puddle, to work up clay and water together; pluther, mire (Whitby Gl.), or with E. blunder, to stir and puddle water, to make it thick and muddy.—Hal. Compare also to muddle, to dabble like ducks in the dirt, also to confuse, perplex. Da. daske, pulse, to stir up water; puls, pudder or thickness of the air or water from smoke, dust, fog, &c. See Puzzle.
If the radical sense of the word be a confusing noise we may comp. G. poltern, to make a noise, in Bav. to disturb, trouble. 'Sie wollten frey und ungepoltert von andern leuten seyn.'
* Pudding. Fr. boudin, Piedm. bodin, Pl.D. budden, pudden (Schütze), pudde-wurst (Brem. Wtb.), properly the gut of an animal stuffed with blood and other materials, w. poten, belly, pudding.
The radical image may be lump or round mass, then something stumpy, short and thick, protuberant, swelling. E. pod, a protuberant belly; poddy, round and stout in the belly (Hal.); Sc. pud, a fat child; N.-E. puddly, fat (Craven Gl.); Northampton puddy, thick-set; Pl.D. puddig, thick (Brem. Wtb.); Wall. s'boder, to swell; bodi, rabodi, stumpy, short and thick; boudenn, belly, navel (Sigart); bodenn, prominent belly, calf of leg (Remacle); OFr. boudine, navel; Piedm. bodero, bodila, a paunchy, thick-set man; Lang. boudougna, boudifla, to swell; boudena, to burst with fat; boudoli, a short and thick person; Castrais boudoul, bouzolo, the belly.
Puddle. To puddle iron, is to stir a portion of melted iron with a bar in a reverberatory furnace until it becomes viscous. G. butteln, buddeln, to poke or root about in earth, ashes, &c.; aschenputtel, one who pokes about in the ashes.—Sanders.
Puddle, a plash of standing water left by rain, a mixture of clay and water. Formed like paddle from a representation of the sound of dabbling in the wet. Du. poedele, to dabble in water.—Overyssel Alm. Fr. dial. patouiller, to paddle; patouille, puddle, dirty water, liquid mud, slops of water.—Jaubert. In these imitative forms an initial p or pl are used with great indifference. Pl.D. pladdem, to paddle or dabble in the water; Dan. pluddre, to work up peat and water together, to puddle. The derivation of Lat. palus, marsh, from the same root, is somewhat obscured by the insertion of a vowel between the p and l.
Pudgy. Soft like mire; then, as soft materials fall back upon themselves and are ill-adapted for a slender structure, short and thickset. Pudge or podge, a puddle. 'The horse-road stood in pudges, and the path was hardly dry.'—Clare. 'And littered straw on all the pudgy sloughs.'— Ib. Banff, pudge, punch, a thickset person or animal, anything short and stout of its kind. Northampton pudgell, gudgell, a puddle; gudgy, short and thick. Podge, to stir and mix together; porridge, a cesspool.—Hal. Sw. puss (Da. puds), a puddle; pussig, fat, bloated. Litet pussigt och lett barn, a litet pudgy child. Bav. bätzen, to dabble in something soft; batzen, botzen, a lump of soft materials; batzig, sloppy, soft, clammy; Hesse, batsch, wet, dirty weather.

Westerwald, batsch, for the sound of plashing or tramping in the wet; batsch, mud, dirt, puddle. G. patsch! represents the sound of a blow with the flat hand, or of a fall upon the soft earth or in the water, or the plashing sound of water. Pitsch, patsch geht das ruder, splash goes the oar; pitschpatschnass, thoroughly wet. "Er patschte ihm das wasser ins gesicht.—Sanders. Hence patsch, the soft pudgy hand of a child; also mud, mire, puddle.

Puerile. Lat. puer, a child.

Puerperal. Lat. puerpera, a woman that has just brought forth; puer, a child, pario, to bring forth, produce.

To Puff. To blow in an intermittent way, thence to swell. It. buffare, to puff, blow hard, bluster; Fr. bouffer, to puff, to swell. A puff, a blast of wind, anything of a swollen airy texture. Du. poffen, to blow, fill the cheeks, swell, brag.

The sound of blowing is very generally represented by the syllable pu, usually with a terminal consonant. ON. pua, to breathe upon, to blow; Sw. pusta, to breathe, blow, pant, to take breath; Lith. pukszti, to pant, snort; pusti, to blow, breathe, snort; Fin. puhua, puhella, pukkia, to blow, breathe, pant; Boh. puch, a breathing; puchnauti, to swell; Russ. putchitsya, to swell; Serv. puati, to blow; pualka, a bellows; Turk. pufla, to blow; Magy. puffadni, to swell, puffanni, pufogni, pufolni, to puff; Malay pupui, to blow; Maori puka, to pant; puku, to swell; Sc. to pec'h, to puff, pant.

Now mon they work and labour, pec'h and pant.

Magy. pihegni, to breathe hard, pant; pihelni, to breathe; pihes, panting.

* Pug.—Puck. OE. pouke, devil.

The heved fleighe fram the bouke The soule nam the helle-fouke.
Arthur and Merlin.

ON. puki, goblin; Sw. dial. puke, devil, goblin, scarecrow; Ir. puca, goblin; Sw. spöke, ghost, goblin, scarecrow.

Essentially the same with bug, W. bwg, an object of terror, ghost, hobgoblin. Russ. pugat, to terrify; pugalo, a scarecrow.

Then, as an ugly mask is used for the purpose of terrifying children, the term pug was applied to a monkey as resembling a caricature of the human face.

Sw. bögg, bögk, a frightful mask, ugly face. The Ptg. term coco, a bugbear, hobgoblin, was applied to the cocoa-nut from the resemblance to a monkey's face at the base of the fruit. A pug-dog is a dog with a short monkey-like face.

Pugilist. Lat. pugil, Gr. πυγμάχος, a fighter with the fists; πύξ, with clenched fist; πυγμή, Lat. pugnus, the fist; pugio, a dagger. From the element shown in pungo, pupugi, to stick, prick.

Pug-mill. A mill for working up clay for bricks. Dan. pukke, to pound ore before melting. E. dial. to pug, to strike; pug, a thrust; to puggle, to poke the fire.—Hal. Pol. puk! the noise of a blow; puk, knock, rap, tap.

Pugnacious. Lat. pugno, to fight. See Pugilist.

Puisne.—Puny. Fr. puisné, since born, younger brother. Puisne, and in an Anglicised form puny, were formerly used in the general sense of junior, but with the exception of puisne, or junior judge, the use is now confined to the metaphorical sense of ill-grown, poor of its kind.

If any shall usurp a motherhood of the rest, and make them but daughters and punies to her, she shall be guilty of a high arrogance and presumption.—Bp Hall in R.

Puissant. Fr. puissant, powerful; formed as if from a participle possens, from Lat. posse, to be able.

To Puke. G. spucken, to spit; Magy. pok, spittle.

To Pule. Fr. piauler, to peep or cheep as a young bird, to pule or howl as a young whelp.—Cot. To make the cry represented by the syllable piau, as miauler, to mewl, to make the cry represented by miau, mew. G. pauzen, Sc. pew, to pule, to cheep as a chicken.

To Pull. A parallel form with pill, signifying originally to pick. Pl.D. pulen, to pick, nip, pluck. To pull garlick, to peel or pill it. The sounds of i and u often interchange. A Glasgow man pronounces which, whuch; pin, pun. In other parts to put is pronounced pit, and on the same principle Du. put, a well, corresponds to E. pit. In OE. we had rug and rig, the back; hulle and hill; cuth and kith, acquaintance; luther and lither, bad, &c. From the present root we must explain Du. puel, pole. It. pula, the husks or hulls, the strippings of corn, and perhaps Lat. polire, It. pulire, to clean or polish, properly to pick clean. The slang expression of polishing off a bone shows the natural connection of the two ideas. Pl.D. upp den knaken pülken, to pick a bone. With an initial s, Lat. spoliare, to strip; spolium, what is stripped off, as the skin of an animal, the arms of an enemy overcome in battle. See To Pill.

Pullet. See Poultry.

Pulley. Fr. poulie, It. poliga, OE. polive, poliff, polein.
Ther may no man out of the place it drive, For non engine of windas or polive. Squire's Tale.
Poleyne, troclea.—Pr. Pm. Sc. pullisee, pulliskee—Jam., Cat. politxa (politsha), pulley; Du. paleye, a frame for torture, a pulley.
The names of the goat and the horse were very generally applied to designate mechanical contrivances of different kinds for supporting, raising, or hurling weights, or for exerting a powerful strain. Thus G. bock, a goat, is used for a trestle, sawing-block, fire-dogs, rack for torture, painter's easel, windlass, or crab for raising weights. Fr. chevre, Lang. crabo, a she-goat, signify a crane; crabo, also trestles or sawing-block, a plasterer's scaffolding.—Dict. Castr. From the same source are derived OSp. cabreia, Prov. calabrc, a catapult; Ptg. cabre, calabrc, a rope or cable; Sp. cabria, Fr. cabre, a crane; cabria, also an axle-tree; cabrio, cabriol, a beam or rafter.
The series taking their designation from the horse comprise Fr. chevalet, a pair of sawing trestles, a rack for torture, a painter's easel; Lat. cantherius (properly a gelding or pack-horse), a rafter or vine-prop, and thence Fr. chantier, a vine-prop, sawing-block, stocks for a ship, stand for a cask; Sp. potro, a colt, rack for torture, frame for shoeing horses; Fr. poutre, a beam; Fr. poulain (colt), a sledge for moving heavy weights, a dray-man's slide for letting down casks into a cellar, or other contrivance for that purpose; the rope wherewith wine is let down into a cellar, a pulley-rope—Cot.; giving rise to OE. poleyn, above-mentioned. Sp. polin, a wooden roller for moving heavy weights on ship-board. The Prov. poli, Lang. pouli, a colt, agree with Fr. poulie, while Piedm. polé, a colt, coincides with Sp. polea, Ptg. polé, a pulley. In like manner Fr. poliche or pouliche, a filly, explains Cat. politxa, and Sc. pullishee, a pulley, as well as Lang. poulejho, the wippe of a well. It. poliga must be regarded as an analogous form, from which we pass to OE. polive, as from It. doga to Fr. douve, a pipe-stave.
The figure of a colt is so commonly used to express a support of one kind or another, that It. poltra, a couch, poltrona, an easy-chair, may perhaps be identified with poltra, a filly, instead of being derived from G. polster, as commonly explained.

Pulmonary. Lat. pulmo, -onis, the lungs.
Pulp. Lat. pulpa, the fleshy part of meat, pith of wood. Gael. plub, sound of a stone falling into water; as a verb, to plump, plunge into water; a soft lump; plubaiche, lumpishness.
Pulpit. Lat. pulpitum, a scaffold, stage, desk.
-puls-. See -pel. Repulse, Impulsion, &c.
* Pulse. Grain contained in a shell or pod, as peas and beans. Pulls, the chaff of peas.—Hal. Probably the pl. of Du. puele, pole, pelle, peule, peascod, shell.—Kil. Peul, peascod; peulvrucht, pulse, leguminous plant.—Bomhoff. Pel, shell, pod; peul, peas.—Halma. From Du. pellen, E. pill, pull, peel; PL.D. pulen, to pick.
Pulverise. Lat. pulvis, pulveris, dust.
Pumice. Lat. pumex.
To Pummel. See Pommel.
Pump. Fr. pompe, ON. pumpa, G. pumpe, in vulgar language plumpe. Lith. plumpa, plumpas. Rightly referred by Adelung to the idea of splashing. The sound of something heavy falling into the water is represented in G. by the syllable plump, whence plumpen, to splash, to beat the water with a pole in fishing; plump-stock, the pole employed for such a purpose. Pumpen, vulgarly plumpen, to pump. In Cornwall plump is a pump or draw-well, to plumpy, to churn, an act in which a plunger is driven up and down in an upright vessel like the piston in a pump. Banff. plump-kirn, the common churn. Pl.D. pump, pumpel, a pestle; pumpeln, to pound.
Pumpkin. See Pompion.
Pun. A play upon words, possibly, as Nares suggests, from OE. pun, to pound, as if hammering on the word.
Punch.—Puncheon, i. Punch, a short, thick fellow, a stage puppet.—B. Banff. pudge, punch, a thickset person or animal, anything short and stout of its kind. Northampt. puddy, pudgy, punchy, short and thickset.—Mrs B. I did hear them call their fat child punch, which pleased me mightily, that word having become a word of common use for everything that is thick and short.—Pepys. Bav. punzen, a short thick person or thing; punzet, thick and short. From signifying something short and thick it seems to have been applied to a barrel or cask, and thence to the belly. Bav. panz, ponz, punz, -en, a cask; bantzen, panzl, belly. Carinthian panze, a cask, and (contemptuously) the belly, a child. It. pun-zone, Fr. poinson, a puncheon. Punch seems to be a nasalised form of pudge, as G. pantsch of the synonymous putsch, mire, puddle, or mantsh of matsch, mire. Pantschen, to paddle, dabble in the wet; also to strike a sounding blow. The signification of something short and thick must be explained on the same principle as in the case of Pudgy. But it may be from the connection which causes so many words signifying a blow to be used also in the sense of a lump or knob, as in the case of bunch. The fact that punch already signified a short thick man probably led to the conversion of Pulcinella, the little hump-backed puppet of the Italians, into Punch-inello, now cut short to Punch.

2. The well-known beverage, said to be from Hindu punch, five. At Nerule is made the best arrack or Nepo da Goa, with which the English on this coast make that enervating liquor called pounche (which is Hindostan for five), from five ingredients.—Fryer, New Account of E. I. and Persia, 1697. The drink certainly seems to have been introduced from India. Or to drink palepuntz (at Goa), which is a kind of drink consisting of aqua vitae, rosewater, juice of citrons, and sugar.—Olearius, Travels to the Grand Duke of Muscovy and Persia, 1669.

To Punch. I. To punch with the fist or the elbow, to strike or thrust. Bunche, tuncio.—Pr. Pm. To hounche or pusshe one; he buncheth me and beateth me, il me pousse.—Palsgr. He came home with his face all to bounced, contusa.—Horm. Pl.D. bumsen, bunsen, to knock so that it sounds. See Bounce. G. pantschen, to strike a sounding blow. ' Den dritten panscht er auf den bauch.'—Sanders. Cimbr. punken, to punch with the fist; punk, fiancata, a punch in the ribs. Swiss bunggen, to give blows, especially with the foot or the elbow. Bav. pumsen, pumbsen, to sound hollow, strike so that it resounds. Dan. dial. pundse, to butt like a ram.

2. It. punzacchiare, punzellare, to punch, push, shove, justle, prick forward, goad; punzone, a sharp-pointed thing, bodkin, pouncer or pounce, ox-goad; punzonare, to pounce, make pouncing work; Fr. poindre, to prick, spur, incite; poinson, a bodkin, a stamp, puncheon. Prikkyn or punchyn, as men doth beestis, pungo.—Pr. Pm. Sp. punchar, punzar, to prick, sting, punch; punzon, a punch, puncheon, a pointed instrument used by artists. Lang. pounchar, to prick, to sting; pounche, Fr. pointal, a support, prop; pouncho, point of a pin; pounchon, a sting, goad. Du. pontsen, ponssen, to punch.

Punctual. — Puncture. — Pungent. See Point.

Punish. Lat. punire, Fr. punir, punis.

Punt. A flat-bottomed boat. Du. pont, a ferry-boat, broad flat boat; navi-gium quo amnes trajiciuntur loco pon-tium.—Kil. Fr. ponton, a ferry-boat, pontoon.

Puny. See Puisne.

Pupil. Lat. pupa, a young girl, a doll, whence the dim. pupilla, an orphan fe-male child, the apple of the eye; pupus, a small child (male), pupillus, an orphan, ward.

Puppet.—Puppy. It. pupa, puppa, a child's baby, puppy, or puppet to play withal.—Fl. Fr. poupée, a baby, a pup-pet, or bable; the flax of a distaff; poupes de chenilles, bunches of caterpillars. Du. pop, a puppet, doll, young baby. The radical meaning, as in the case of doll, seems simply a bunch of clouts. Du. pop, popje, cocoon or nest of caterpillars; pop aan een schermdegen, the button on a foil; brand-pop, a bunch of tow dipped in pitch to set a house on fire. Magy. bub, a bunch or tuft; buba, a doll. It is from the obsolete sense of a doll, and not in the modern one of a young dog, that the term puppy is applied to a conceited, finely-dressed young man. In the same way, Du. pop is applied to a flaunting girl.—Bomhoff.

Purblind. Pure-blind, altogether blind, or else simply blind, just blind, able to see a little. In the former sense it is used by R. G. Me ssolde pulte out bothe hys eye and make him purblynd,—p. 376. Purblynde, luscus.—Pr. Pm. Du. puur, pure, simple, only; puursteken, alto-gether; puursteken blind, altogether blind; puur willens, with hearty good will. Sw. dial. purblind, totally blind. Comp. G. rein, pure, clean; rein-blind, -taub, -toll, -voll, totally blind, deaf, &c.—Dief. in v. ragitu. The sense of partially blind is a softening down in a manner similar to that in which we say, 'Oh, he is quite blind; he cannot see across the street.'

Purchase. Fr. pourchasser, eagerly to pursue, thence to obtain the object of pursuit; It. procacciare, to shift or chase for, to procure.—Fl. See Chase.

Purfle. — Purl. Ornamental work about the edge of a garment. It. porfilo, the profile or outline of a person's face, a border in armoury, the surface or superficies of anything, any kind of purfling lace ; porfilare, to overcast with gold or silver lace ; Fr. pourfiler, to purfle, tinsel, or overcast with gold thread, &c.—Cot. E. purl (contracted of purfle), a kind of edging for bone lace.—B. Sc. pearling, lace.

Purge.—Purgative. Lat. purgare, to cleanse ; from purus, clean.
Purify.—Puritan. Lat. purus, clean.
To Purl. Du. borrelen, to bubble, to spring as water.
Betres lay burlyng in hur blode.
Florence of Rome, 1639.—with the blood bubbling forth.
Swab. burren (of the wind), to roar. G. perlen, to bubble. Sw. porla, to simmer, bubble, murmur, rumble, gurgle.
Purlieu. Land which having once been part of the royal forest has been severed from it by perambulation (pour-allée, OFr. purale'e) granted by the Crown.
The preamble of 33 E. I. c. 5 runs—'Cume aucune gentz que sount mys hors de forest par la purale—aient requis a cest parle-ment qu'ils soient quites—des choses que les foresters lour demandent.'
In the course of the statute mention is made of terres et tenements deaforestés par la purale. These would constitute the purlieu. A purlieu or purlie-man is a man owning land within the purlieu licensed to hunt on his own land.
To Purloin. To make away with. Purlongyn or put far away, prolongo, alieno.—Pr. Pm. Purloigner, to prolong (a truce).—Lib. Custom, 166. Fr. loin, far.
Purport. OFr. pourporter, declarer, faire savoir.—Roquef. The simple por-ter, to carry, is used in a similar sense.
Les lettres d'aujourd'hui portent que, &c., bring news, announce that, &c. The import of a deed is what it signifies or carries in it.
Purpose. OFr. pourpenser, to be-think oneself, a word afterwards sup-planted by proposer, to purpose, design, intend, also to propose, propound.—Cot.
For all his purpose, as I gesse; Was for to maken great dispence.
Chaucer, R. R.
In the original the word is pourpens.
De aweit purpensed, ex insidiis precogitatis.
Leg. Gul. I.
Pourpos, design, resolution.—Roquef.
Purpresture. An encroachment or enclosure out of the common property, a taking part of it into one's own possession.
Fr. pourprendre, -pris, to possess wholly (Cot.), investir, envelopper, usurper, oc-cuper.—Roquef.
Quand je vis la place porprendre, Lui et sa gent de toutes parts.
Pourprins, possessed on every side, fully held; pourpris, pourprissure, an in-closure, a close.
To Purr. Represents the sound made by a cat. G. murren, schnurren.
Purse. Fr. bourse. It. borsa, Sp. bolsa, a purse. Gr. βύρσα, Lat. bursa, a hide, skin, leather.
To Pursue.—Pursaivant. Fr. pour-suivre, in Berri poursuír, to pursue, to prosecute ; poursuivant, a suitor, suer ;—d'armes, a herald extraordinary, a bat-chelor in heraldry, one that's like to be chosen when the place falls.—Cot. See Sue.
Pursy. OE. Purcyfe, short-winded or stuffed about the stomach, pourcif.—Palsgr. It is singular that the more modern forms poulsif, poussif, should be truer to the origin, Lat. pulsare, Fr. poul-ser, pousser, to beat or thrust.
There is so much analogy between the action of the lungs and the pulse of the heart that we need not be surprised at finding Prov. polsar used in the sense of breathe or pant.—Raym. Hence Fr. pousse (in horses), broken wind, choke-damp in mines ; poussif, short-winded. It. pul-sivo, panting, also pursy, short or broken-winded ; pulsare, to pant, to beat.—Fl.
Lang. poulsa, to take breath ; Du. bul-sen, pulsare et tussire.—Kil. Swiss bülze, to cough.—Idiot. Bern.
Purtenance. See Appurtenance.
Purulent.—Pus.—Suppurate. Lat. pus, puris, Gr. πύον, Sanscr. pūya; pūyana, discharge from a sore, matter. Doubtless, like putris, from the foul smell. See Putrid.
Purvey. Fr. pourveoir, to purvey or provide. Lat. providere.
Purview. The provisions of an act of Parliament. Fr. pourvu, provided.
To Push. Fr. poulser, pousser, to push, thrust; Lat. pulso, to push, strike, beat; It. bussare, to knock.
Pusillanimous. Lat. pusus, a little boy ; pusillus, little, insignificant ; animus pusillus, a faint heart.
Puss. Du. poes, Pl.D. puus, puusmau, puuskatte. Originally a cry either to call or to drive away a cat, from an imitation of the noise made by a cat spitting, G. pfuchzen, to spit like a cat. Serv. pis ! cry to drive away, Alban. piss ! to call a cat ; pisso, puss, cat in nursery language.
Lith. puz, puiz (z = Fr. j), cry to call a cat ; puize, puss.

Pustule. Lat. pusula, pustula, a blister, swelling, pimple, pock. The equivalent of Gr. φυσάλις, a bladder, bubble, from φυσάω, to puff, to blow. Lett. pāschlis, a bladder ; pūst, to blow. Da. puste, to blow ; pūse, to swell up. The image of blowing is represented in a very wide range of languages by the syllable pu or fū.
To Put. Properly to push or poke. Da. putte, to put, put into, put away. Fr. bouter, to thrust, put, bud, to put forth leaves. It. buttare, to cast, fling ; botta, a stroke. W. pwtio, to poke, thrust ; E. dial. to pote, poit, to poke. In OE. there is frequently an intrusive l, pult, as in jolt compared with jot.
-pute.— Putative. Lat. puto, to cast in one's mind, to reckon, think. Hence computo, to reckon together, to sum up; dispute, to cast one's thoughts in opposition to another; imputo, to reckon to one ; reputo, to consider, to think and think again. Putativus, supposed.
Putrid.— Putrefy. Lat. puteo, to stink ; putidus, stinking ; thence puter or putris, putridus, rotten, corrupt. Gr. πύθω, πήσω, to rot. Sanscr. pū, stinking ; pūti, pūtika, putrid, stinking ; puy, to putrefy, to stink. Lett. pūt, to rot. The interjection pu ! or fu ! represents the exspiration with closed nose by which we reject an offensive smell. Sp. pu ! exclamation of disgust at a bad smell ; excrements of children.—Neum. Pl.D. pu! apu! interj. by which children express their disgust at anything stinking or nasty. Dat is apu, that is nasty. Ha puh, wie stank der alte mist !—Sanders. Russ. fu ! fie ! fukaty, to detest, to huff (i. e. blow) at draughts. Lett. pūst, to puff, to blow. See Fie ! Faugh !
Puttock. A kite. It. bozzago, a buzzard.

Putty. A pasty mass composed of powder of metallic oxides and oil used for fastening glass in windows, stopping holes in carpentry, &c. Fr. potée, a glazier's putty, also in foundries the mixture of clay and horsedung used for moulds ; potée d'émeril, the pasty residue of emery and oil arising from the grinding of precious stones. The essential meaning is something of a pasty nature, from Lat. puls, pultis, pap, whence It. poltiglia, Milan, poltía, pap, poultice, batter, also mud, slime, especially that which comes from the sawing of stones ; spoltí, as potée d'émeri, also mud from the grindstone. Mason's putty is a pasty material used for filling cavities. ' The interior of the bed was filled with fine mason's putty, consisting of lime and stonedust.'—Report on Holborn Viaduct, Dec. 17, 1869.
To Puzzle. To confuse, bewilder. A figure taken from the puddling or troubling of water, the sound of dd and zz before l easily interchanging, as in fuddle and fuzzle, muddle and muzzy. Puzzle-headed and muddle-headed are synonymous. Something sure of state, Hath fuddled his clear spirit.—Othello. In the same way blunder, signifying originally to trouble water, is used metaphorically in the sense of confound. To shuffle and digress so as by any means whatsoever to blunder an adversary.—Ditton in R.
Pygmy. Gr. πυγμαιος, from πυγμή, a measure of length, from the elbow to the knuckles.
Pyramid. Gr. πυραμίς, from the form taken by the flame of a fire ; πῦρ, fire.
Pyre. Gr. πυρά, a funeral pile.
Pyrites.—Pyro-. Gr. πῦρ, -ος, fire ; πυρίτης (λίθος, stone), a stone which strikes fire.

Quack.—Quacksalver. The salving of wounds was so generally taken as a type of the healing art, that no reasonable doubt can be entertained of the meaning of the latter element in G. quacksalber, Du. kwakzalver, kwakzalfster, E. quacksalver. The import of the element quak is not so clear. It has usually been explained as having reference to the noisy outcry with which the quacksalver or mountebank (G. marktschreier) vaunts his wares. Seek out for plants with signatures To quack of universal cures.—Hudibras. Du. kwak, a jest, or story. De kwakzalver vertelde aardige kwakken, the mountebank told them funny stories.—P. Marin. But when we look to the dialects of the north of Europe, where the word seems to have originated, we are led to a different explanation. Du. quakkelen, Pl.D. quackeln, seem to be parallel forms with G. quackeln, wacheln, wankeln, E. quaggle (Hal.), waggle, expressing in the first place the agitation of liquids, and then wavering, splashing, spilling, dabbling, bungling, babbling. In the sense of wavering, G. quackeln, to waggle, waver (Kütn.), Pl.D. quakkel-haftig, wavering, inconstant; Du. quakkelen, to freeze and thaw by turns, to vary in health, to be an invalid; quakkel-winter, a mild winter; quakkel-ziekte, a slight indisposition. Pl.D. Ik kier mi an keen quakkeln, I stand no trifling, I go my own way. The sense of splashing, dabbling, spilling, is seen in Pl.D. ver-quakkeln, to waste one's money on trifles; Du. quakkelgeld, money for small ex-penses; quak, a slop, drop of liquid left in a glass, a trifle; quacken, quackelen, dissipare, profundere (Kil.); Da. quakle, to dabble, bungle, deal in what one does not rightly understand. Quakleri i land-bruget, i lægekonster, dabbling in farm-ing, in medicine. Kiærlingquakleri, old-wives' doctoring; forquakle, to spoil by unskilful management; f. en sag, sin hel-bred, to bungle a business, to spoil one's health by quackery. N. kvakla, to bungle, botch. Sw. quackla, quacksalwa, to drug, to physic; q. med sig, to take too many slops, to take a great deal of physic to little purpose.—Widegren: quacklande, too much medicine, quackery, charlatan-ery.—Nordforss. The original meaning of quacksalver would thus be a dabbler in medicine, an idea expressed also (although from a dif-ferent metaphor) by the Du. synonym lapzalver, a bungler in medicine, pro-perly a cobbler of the body, from lappen, to patch, to botch, or mend clumsily. We may compare also Bav. batzig, soft, clammy, sloppy; batzen, to handle ma-terials of such a nature; batzeln, to dab-ble in medicines, to doctor oneself. Du. kladden, to dawb, dabble; klad-salver, a quack.

To Quack. To make a noise like a duck or frog. Aristophanes represents the croaking of a frog by the syllables Koaξ, Koaξ. Lat. coaxare; G. quacken, guacksen, to croak like a frog; Lith. kwakšti, kwakseti, to croak, quack, cluck, gaggle.

Quadr-. Quadri-. Quadru-. In Lat. compounds, like quadrangle, quad-ruped, &c., from quatuor, four. Quadratit, the quarter of a circle; Lat. quad-rans, the fourth part. Quadroon, Fr. quarteron, one a fourth part a negro.

To Quaff. I quaught, I drink all out, je bois d'autant.—Palsgr. In Scotland a child is said to wacht when sucking so forcibly as to swallow a considerable quantity at once. Waught, a hearty draught.
Cou'd your skill But help us to a waught of ale, I'd be oblig'd t' ye a' my life.—Ramsay.
To waucht, waught, wauch, to drink copiously.
Thay skink the wyne and wauchtis cowpys full.
Nather Lord nor Knicht he lute alane, Except his coup war wachtit out alway.
Burne in Jam.
Thay wauchit at the wicht wyne.—Dunbar.
The forms above cited seem to represent the sounds made in an eager draught of liquid, as Sw. quáfwa, to choke, does the sound of gasping for breath in choking. Analogous forms are G. hauchen, E. huff, whiff, to draw the breath, waft, a draught of air, Sc. waff, to blow; the resemblance in sound between the act of drawing breath and of taking a draught of liquid being witnessed by Sc. souch (ch gutt.), souf, to draw a deep breath as in sleep-ing, Fr. souffler, to breathe, and G. saufen, to drink deep; soff, a draught, or gulp.

Quag.—Quagmire. Provincially gog and gogmire. Quaggle, a tremulous mo-tion.—Hal. See Quake.

Quail. Du. quackel. It. quaglia, Gri-sons quacra, a quail, from the note of the bird. Coturnices, quacoles.—Gl. de Reichenau. Du. quacken, to cry as a quail; Pl.D. quackeln, to tattle. Mid. Lat. quaquila, Prov. quisquila, a quail; quilar, Sw. quillra, to pipe, to twitter. Zulu quehle, expressive of a ringing sound, partridge; quali, the small wild red pheasant, so called from its noise.—Dohne.

To Quail. 1. To curdle as milk.—B. In s. s. It. quagliare, cagliare, Ptg. coal-har, Fr. cailler, W. ceulo. It. quaglio, gaglio, Du. quaghel, W. caul, Lat. coagu-lum, rennet, the infusion used to curdle milk. Of these the Lat. coagulum, ren-net, or curdled milk, derived from con and agere, to drive together, is commonly supposed to be the original. But the word admits of a perfect explanation from the Germanic root shown in E. dial. quag-gle, a tremulous motion (Hal.), G. quackeln, to waver, on the same principle on which N. quap, a soft gelatinous body, soft fat or flesh, is derived from ON. quapa, to tremble. In like manner may perhaps be explained E. curdle, properly cruddle, from Prov. cratlar, OFr. crodler, crosier, to shake. Compare also Swiss hottern, to shake, to jog, with Du. hoi, hotte, curds; Sc. hattít cream, clotted cream.
If we may judge from the words signifying butter and cheese, the Latins seem to have learned dairy operations from the Germanic races, and coagulum may be an accommodation of the form quagel to a Latin derivation, in the same way that the G. butter was made to bear a reference to the animal from whence it was produced, when adopted in Greek under the form of βούτυρον, as if from βοῦς, an ox.

2. To quail, as when we speak of one's courage quailing, is probably a special application of quail, in the sense of curdle. The bodily effect of fear or horror being very similar to that of great cold, these mental emotions are represented as causing the blood to congeal or curdle.
Yet I express to thee a mother's care: God's mercy, maiden, does it curd thy blood To say I am thy mother?
To-day a mighty hero comes, to warm "Your curdling blood, and bid you Britons arm.
Garth.
The guilty man felt his heart curdle with terror.
.—Love's Sacrifice, p. 266.
Mi s'agghiaccio il sangue per la paura, my blood congealed with fear. So also It. cagliare, Piedm. quajá, to curdle as milk, to begin to be afraid of one's adversary, to quail in one's courage.—Fl.
The metaphor is carried still further in It. cagliare, to hold one's peace; Sp. callar, to keep silence, to abate, become calm.
When somer took in hand the winter to assaile With force of might, and vertue great, his stormy blasts to quaile.—Surry in R.
We are apt to be distracted from the foregoing explanation by Du. quelen, to pine away, to languish, to fade. 'T gewas queelt op het veld, the herb fades in the field. De hoochste van het volck des lants quelen: sink, are overcome.—Bible in Weiland. Devonshire queal, to faint away; squeal, infirm, weak. But the resemblance is purely accidental, the latter forms being from the pipy tones of a sick person. Pol. kwilić, to pule, wail, whine, lament, Du. quelen, quenen, gemere, languere, languore tabescere.—Kil. ledge of, familiarity, acquaintance, also quaintness, neatness, spruceness; contigie, curious ornaments, quaint trimmings used of women rather for grace and show than for use.—Fl. Prov. conte, cointe, coinde, conge, gracious, agreeable, pretty; coindansa, acquaintance, agreeableness; coindeiar, Fr. cointoier, to deck forth, embellish, make oneself agreeable. It. accontare, to acquaint or meet with.
Notwithstanding the singular agreement with Lat. comptus, trimmed, adorned, the word must be derived either from Lat. cognitus (as Diez supposes), or from G. kund, kundig, known, acquainted with, a sense in which Fr. coint was formerly used. Dunt il ja bien fut cointe: of which he was already informed.—Alexis in Diez. The transference to the later signification arises from the amenities which grow out of civilised intercourse.
So from the equivalent AS. cuth, known, we have Sc. couth, couthy, familiar, agreeable in conversation, pleasant, loving, affectionate, giving satisfaction.—Jam.
A mankie gown of our own kintra growth Did make them very braw and unco couth.
ON. kunnliga, comiter, familiariter. Uncouth is the opposite of quaint; awkward, revolting, displeasing.
To Quake.—Quag. Forms representing broken sound are very frequently used to signify broken movements, such as the agitation of liquids or the quavering or shaking of things more or less soft or loose. Thus Du. gagelen, to gaggle, or make the harsh broken sounds of a goose, Bret. gagéz, to stutter, lead to Swiss gageln, to joggle, gagen, to rock; E. goggle, to roll to and fro; gogmire, a quagmire or shaking bog. A slight modification of the radical syllable gives Du. quacken, to cry like a goose, frog, or quail (Kil.); ON. quaka, quackla, to twitter as birds; E. dial. quaggle, quackle, to make choking sounds in the throat (Nall, Dial. of E. Anglia), from which we pass to G. quackeln, to joggle, waggle, totter, E. quaggle, a tremulous motion (Hal.), and quake, to shake. Du. waggelen, G. wackeln, to jog, totter, shake, E. waggle, wag, are essentially the same words with the initial qu softened down to a simple w.
Qualify.—Quality. Lat. qualitas, whatlike-ness, from qualis, whatlike, of what sort. See Which.
Qualm. A feeling of sickness, fig. a distressing thought suddenly coming over us.
They sayed, our soul is qualmyshe over thys meate—and is readye to caste it up agayne.—Udal in R.
AS. cwealm, cwylm, destruction, pesti-lence, death.
Vol of syknesse, and of qualm and sorwe thys lond was tho, Of honger and of vuele (evil) geres.—R. G. The radical image is shown in Dan. quale, to choke, offering a type of abso-lute destruction when the breath is en-tirely stopped, or of every degree of op-pression from positive torture to mere sickness of the stomach. Sw. quälja, to turn the stomach, produce sickness; fig. to grieve, torment; qual, torment, suffer-ing, oppression of the chest, sickness; samwets-qual, remorse, qualms of con-science; döds quälet, the agony of death; qualm, hot, stifling weather; qualmig, qualmish, sickening. G. qualm, a vapour, exhalation, thick smoke, properly a chok-ing smoke; qualmig, full of steam or smoke.
Quantity. Lat. quantitas; quantus, how much.
To Quap.—Quave.—Quaver. To quap, to quake, pant, tremble.—B. To quave, to have a tremulous motion.—R. Earthquave, quavemire, earthquake, quagmire. ON. quapa, Bav. quabeln, G. quabbeln. Da. quabbre, to shake like a jelly, or loose fat; Du. quabbe, a dewlap, from its quavering movement; Swab. quabbe, a morass. To quaver with the voice is to utter a shaking note, to rise and fall in the musical scale, to speak un-steadily. We have seen under Quake the mode in which terms originally repre-senting a broken sound are applied to movements of analogous character. Now it is matter of indifference in representing an abrupt sound whether the syllable is made to end with a guttural or a labial. We use whap and whack indifferently for a sounding blow, and so in Du. the sylla-bles quap! or quak! represent the sound of a sudden fall. Dat gaf eenen harden quak!—Weiland. Quakken, to throw down. Hee strukelden, en quap! daar li 'e, he stumbled, and slap! there he lay.—Overyssel Almanach. Da. quoppe, quobbe, to give a hollow sound like a blow on an inflated body or a horse trotting.
Quarantine. Fr. quarantaine, a period of forty days; quarante, Lat. quadraginta, forty.
Quarrel. 1. Fr. querelle, quarrel, broil, altercation. Lat. querela, com-plaint; queri, to complain. The repre-sentation of the high tones of complaint or anger by a root similar to that which gives rise to the foregoing forms is widely spread. G. quarren, to cry as children, to grumble, wrangle.
Menschenfreundlich, nicht ein quarrer Ist der bibelfeste pfarrer.—Sanders.
ON. kurr, complaint, murmur; Fin. ku-rista, to speak in a high thin tone, to complain, cry as a child; kiristä, to cry as a child; kirid, querulous.
2. Fr. quarreau, a quarrel or boult for a cross-bow, an arrow with a four-square head.—Cot.
Quarry. 1. Fr. quarrière, carrière, a place where stones are hewn for building; quarrieur, a quarrier, a hewer of stones in quarries. Mid.Lat. quadra, Fr. quarre, anything cut square; G. quader, quaderstein, Prov. caire, a stone squared for building; Fr. quarrer, to cut square.
2. Among falconers any game flown at and killed.—B. In this sense the word is from Fr. curée, the entrails of the game, which were commonly given to the dogs at the death. Curée, a dog's reward, the hounds' fees of, or part in, the game they have killed.—Cot. Norm. couraie (Pat. de Brai), It. curata, corata, corada, cora-della, the intestines of an animal, heart, liver, lungs, &c. From cor, heart. Corata, intestini intorno al cuore.—La Crusca. In the dialect of Lyons cora is the pluck of an animal; courée de mouton, fressure de mouton.—Dict. Etym. Mid.Lat. co-rallum, OFr. corailles, intestines.—Duc.
The word is written cuyerie by De Foix in his Miroir de la Chasse, and was imported into E. under the form of querre or querry. The book of St Albans in-structs us in 'undoing' a hart to take out 'the tongue and the brains, laying them with the lights—the small guts and the blood upon the skin—to reward the hounds, which is called the querry.'—N. & Q., May 9, 1857. To make a hawk to the querre is to teach him to find his game. In the following passage of Hey-wood the word is clearly used in the sense of the Fr. original:
Aye, but 't was at the querre. Not at the mount like mine: i. e. at the distribution of the reward, which was made at the close of the chase. In the same sense must be ex-plained a passage of Hollinshed, which has been misunderstood by Nares. 'The vii of Auguste was made a generall hunt-yng with a toyle raised of foure or five miles in lengthe, so that many a deere was that day brought to the quarrie:' brought to the distribution, not to the square (carrée) or inclosure where the animal was killed. Considered with reference to the dogs, the curée or querrée was the practical object of the chase, and thus came to be applied to the game killed. Defendre la curée was to keep the dogs from the game till it was properly prepared for them. And metaphorically soldiers are said to be en curée when they have seized their quarry, or are making valuable plunder.—Trevoux.
Quart.—Quarto. Lat. quatuor, four; quartus, fourth; whence quart, the fourth part of a gallon; quarto, a sheet of paper folded in four; quarter, a fourth part, &c.
Quarter. The conformation of our bodily frame naturally leads us to divide the horizon into four quarters, fore and aft, right and left. Hence quarter is taken as the type of position, or division; as when we ask a person what quarter he is come from, or speak of a certain quarter or division of a city.
In a more confined sense, quarters, in military language, is the special residence appointed to particular army corps, or even individuals.
Again, from signifying a definite position the word is extended to the notion of limitation, conditions. To keep quarter is to keep within certain bounds, limits, or terms.
They do best who if they cannot but admit Love, yet make it keep quarter, and sever it wholly from their serious affairs.—Bacon in Todd.
Friends all but now In quarter and in terms, like bride and groom Divesting them for bed, and then but now Swords out and tilting one at other's breast, ‘Mr Wharton, who detected some hundred of the bishop's mistakes, meets with very ill quarter from his lordship:’ very ill conditions.—Swift in Todd.
Clarendon speaks of ‘offering them quarter for their lives if they would give up the castle.’
Finally, to give quarter was used in an elliptical sense for sparing life, keeping within bounds, not proceeding to the utmost extremities.
That every one should kill the man he caught, To keep no quarter.—Drayton in R.
Quartz, g. quarze or querze, a name formerly given to crystals forming in the earth from the solution of disintegrated elements, but now confined to crystallized silex. Quarzchen von alaun, salz-quarze, crystals of alum, of salt.—Sanders.
To Quash. Fr. quasser, casser, to crash in pieces, quash asunder, also to casse, annul, abrogate.—Cot. Lat. quassare, to shatter, dash to pieces, enfeeble. Sp. cascar, to crush, break to pieces; It. casciare, to squash or crush flat; accasciare, accastiare, to squash, to dash or bruise together. G. quetschen, to quash, crush, bruise. Imitative. See Cashier.
To Quaver. See Quap.
Quay. See Key, 2.
Queach.—Queachy. Queach is used in two senses, the connection between which is not very obvious, though immediately derived from a common root.
The term is commonly applied by Drayton to boggy unstable ground.
Whereas the anvil's weight and hammer's dreadful sound Even rent the hollow woods and shook the queachy ground.
Here the word is identical with the element quick in quickmire, a quagmire (Hal.), quicksilver, ON. quikr, mobilis, tremens, and with the verb to quiche, queach, quinch, to stir, to move slightly.—Hal.
In the second sense, a queach is a plot of land left unploughed because full of bushes or roots of trees.—Forby.
All sylvan copses and the fortresses Of thorniest queaches.—Chapman.
Here the radical idea is the spontaneous growth of bushes and thorns by which the land is infested, and the word is identical with the name quickgrass, quitch or squitch, the troublesome grass that spreads over our corn-fields. Du. queycken, quicken, to breed; Pl.D. queken, to propagate, quek, Du. queek, Ditmarsh quitsch, squitch. G. queck is extended to weeds in general.—Sanders. E. dial. quickwood, thorns.—Hal.
* Quean. A disrespectful term for a woman.
That stool, the dread of every scolding quean. Gay.
Sc. quean, queyn, a young woman; a sturdy queyne, a hure-queyne. Like wench it has in itself no evil signification, being merely the AS. cwen, woman, wife, queen, with the disrespectful quality implied. When used in this way it was very early marked by a difference of spelling (and probably of pronunciation) from queen.
At churche in the charnel cheorles are uvel to knowe. Other a knyght fro a knave, other a queyne fro a queene.—P. P.
Or prelate living jolily Or prieste that halt his quein him by. Chaucer, R. R.

The word has met with a similar fate in the cognate languages, and a still wider distinction has in some cases grown up between the original word and the depreciatory application of it. Du. quene, mulier vana, garrula, improba, procax, et meretrix: quenen-kaap, ineptiae, aniles fabulae.—Kil. Da. quinde, a wo-man; quind, a quean. ON. kona, a wo-man, is still in some parts of Sweden used in the original sense, but in ordinary Swedish it signifies a worthless wench or strumpet, while the word for woman is qvinna. See Queen.
Queasy. Sickish at stomach.—B. Pl.D. quaos'n, to pick and choose in eat-ing; verquaos'n, to spoil the fodder by turning it over in so doing.—Danneil.
Queen. AS. cwen, woman, wife, queen. 'Abrahames cwen,' 'thes Caseres cwen.' Cwen-fugol, a hen-bird. Goth. quens, queins, quins, woman; ON. kona, kuna, in comp. quenn-, woman; quenndyr, fe-male animal; quennkind, womankind. —Russ., Boh. zena, Pol. zona, Gr. γυνή, Sanscr. jani, Pers. zen, woman. From the root jan, Gr. γεν, to bring forth.
Queer. It is singular that two cant words, rum and queer, signifying good and bad respectively, have both come to be used in the sense of curious, out of the common way, odd. Bene, good; queer, nought; ken, a house; quyerkyn, a prison-house; to cutte queere whyddes, to geve evill wordes.—Harman, Caveat, A.D. 1567.
To Quell. The primitive meaning of the word is shown in Dan. quæle, to choke, strangle, suffocate; fig. to quell or suppress. Quellyn or querkyn, suffoco. —Pr. Pm. Sw. quälja, to oppress the stomach, cause sickness. Det quäljer mig, I feel sick, qualmish. Fig. to tor-ment, distress; quälja samwetet, to wring the conscience;—någons rätt, to violate the rights of one. Quäljas, to suffer, be ailing, languish. AS. cwellan, acquellan, OE. quell, to kill; AS. cwellere, a killer, manslayer, tormentor. In the same way ON. querka, to strangle, choke, to slay, kill; Sw. quafwa, to suffocate, strangle, suppress, tame, extinguish.
The origin of quæle, to choke, like that of G. kehle, the throat, is to be found in a representation of the guttural noises made by a person choking. We repre-sent by the syllable quawk the deep gut-tural note of a raven, or the inarticulate sounds of a person choking.
E'en roused by quawking of the flopping crows.
Clare.

Quawkened (made to cry quawk), almost choked.—Mrs Baker. ON. quaka, to sigh; Pl.D. quakken, to groan. We have then provincially to quackle, to interrupt breathing, formed to express the inar-ticulate sound then uttered (Forby), to choke (Hal.). Hence forms like Lith. kaklis, the neck, and contractedly (as E. quack compared with Du. quackelen), Esthon. kael, kaal, the neck; G. kehle, the throat. In the same way E. joll, jowl, chowl, from AS. geagl, geahlas, throat, jaws.
To Quench. AS. cwincan, OFris. kwinka, to waste away; AS. cwencan, acwencan, acwinan, to quench. The radical image seems to be the whining tone of a sick person, figuratively used to signify the sick condition of the patient, and thence a languishing, failing state, gradual extinction. Du. quijnen, que-nen, gemere, languere, languore tabes-cere.—Kil. Pl.D. quinen, to wail, com-plain, to be poorly.—Brem. Wtb. Dan. tvinne, to whine, whimper, to pine away; Sw. twina, to languish, to fade away, to perish. AS. cwanian, to mourn, to lan-guish; wanian, to lament, bewail, also to wane, to decrease. The final c, ch, of AS. cwencan, E. quench, indicates a fre-quentative form answering to ON. kveinka, to keep complaining; E. dial. whinnock, intensitive of whinny, to whimper like a child—Forby; Bav. quenken, quenkeln, to whimper; G. quengeln, to speak in a whining tone of voice.
The verb signifying extinction of life is subsequently applied to a flame from the analogy between the subjects with which we are so familiar. Thæt fyr acwan was, the fire was quenched.
To Querken.—Wherken. To choke. Chekened or querkened.—Pr. Pm. Noié, drowned, whirkined.—Cot. From the guttural sounds made by a person chok-ing. Lith. quarkti, G. quarken, to croak like a frog. E. dial. to querk, to grunt, to moan.—Hal. Querking, the deep slow breathing of a person in pain, a tendency to groaning.—Exmoor Scolding. Fris. quarke, to breathe hard, to catch the breath; querke, to throttle; querk, the throat.—Outzen. In the same way from quawk, representation of a guttural sound, quawkened or quockened, almost choked. —Mrs Baker.
To the same imitative root belong Fin. kurkku, kulkku, the throat, chops, neck, G. gurgel, Lat. gurgulium, the windpipe.
Quern. A handmill. Goth. quairnus, AS. cweorn, OHG. quirn, ON. quorn, a mill; Lith. girna. Boh. zernow, millstone;

Lith. girnos (pl.), Pol. zarna (pl.), hand-mill.
Perhaps from the whirring sound of the stone in turning. Du. quirren, to creak, G. kirren, to make a shrill tremulous sound; W. chwyrn, whizz, snarl, whirl; OHG. quirtian, MHG. zwirnen, to whirl. Sanscr. jirna, tritus; jri, to grind.

Cuerpo. Sp. cuerpo (Lat. corpus), body, and specially the trunk of the body. En cuerpo de camisa, in his shirt-sleeves, half dressed. En cuerpo, in his doublet, without the cloak necessary to complete the out-door attire. Hence in querpo was used by our writers of the 17th cen-tury for in undress.

Boy, my cloak and rapier, it fits not a gentle-man of my rank to walk the streets in querpo.—B. & F. in Nares.

Quert. Ease, quiet, safety. Quert or whert, incolumis, sanus, sospes. To make quarfulle, prosperare.—Pr. Pm.

Bitwene the adder and the grehound The cradel turned upsodown on ground—The stapeles hit upheld all quert. That the child n'as nowt ihert.
Seven Sages, 771.

Than was the king ful glad in hert That thai were hale and in quert.—Ibid. 3862.

My life, my hele and all my hert, My joy, my comfort and my quert, Ywaine and Gawaine, 1488.

N. kvar, still, quiet, at ease. Haer aer saa kvart og stilt. Kvare seg, kurre seg, to set oneself to rest. ON. kyrr., tranquil. At sitia um kyrt, to live quiet at home. At kyrraz, to grow calm. Kura, rest.

The origin would seem to be the cower-ing attitude of a bird at rest. N. kura, to bow the head, rest, lie still, sleep. Kure seg is said of birds when they put their heads under the wing to sleep.

Querulous. Lat. querulus, from que-ror, to complain.

Query. From Lat. Quære (seek, ask, inquire), which is often used as a mark of interrogation to call attention to a ques-tion we are about to ask. It is doubtless from this source that the mark of interro-gation is derived, representing, as it un-mistakeably does, the initial Q of Quære. -quest, -quisite, -quire. Lat. quæro, quæsitum, to seek, inquire. As in In-quest, Exquisite, Require, &c.

Quibble. To play with words, to equivocate, to move as the guts do.—B. A word of like formation with G. quab-beln, mentioned under Quap, but indicat-ing (like quiver, compared with quaver) a finer, quicker movement, by force of the QUICK thin vowel i. Bret. gwiblen, a weather-cock; Gael. cuibhle, circular motion; W. chwip, a quick flirt or turn. See Quip, Quirk.

Quick. The analogy between sound and movement is nowhere better illus-trated than in the origin of quick, and the numerous connected forms. The radical image is a quivering sound, the represent-ation of which is used to signify a quiver-ing movement, and thence applied to express the idea of life as the principle of movement. G. quick! quick! quick! are used interjectionally to represent a sharp shrill sound, as the squeak of a pig or a mouse, the grating of a wheel; gequieke, gequieks, gequietsch, squeaking, twitter. 'Quieksen wie junge Eule.' 'Ferkel quietschen so.' 'Den quitschenden tönen der violinen.'—Sanders. Silesian quick-ern, to titter. Bav. quitscher, quitschern, to twitter, to creak; der quicker, the chaf-finch. With a nasal, Du. quincken, quinc-kelen, quinckeren, to warble, quaver.

Then passing to the sense of move-ment, to quick, to stir; to quetch, to budge or stir, to cry.—B. To quitsch, queach, quinch, to make a slight noise, to stir, to flinch.—Hal. I quytche, I styrre or move with my bodye, or make noyse, je tinte; I quynche, I make a noyse, je tinte.—Palsgr. ON. quika, to move; quiktré, a peg that moves to and fro; quiksandr, a quicksand. Du. quicken, vibrare, librare, agitare, movere, mobili-tare, also, vivere et moveri; quincken micare, motitari, dubio et tremulo motu ferri.—Kil. Da. quickstjert, a wagtail; Fris. quinksteert, an earwig, from the way in which it turns up its tail when threat-ened:

From the notion of mobility to that of life is an almost imperceptible step. ON. quikr, moveable, tremulous, active, live; E. quick, active, rapid in movement, also living, having the principle of movement in oneself. Quicksand, a moving sand; quicksilver, moving silver, or living silver, argentum vivum. Da. quæg, living, quick; quægsand, quicksand, uniting quick with quag. Fris. quek-, quink-, quag-jacht (jacht = light), a moving light, will-o'-the-wisp.

The softening down of the initial qu to wh and w gives a similar series. E. dial. whicker, to neigh; whink, a sharp cry; ON. hvika, kvika, to flinch, to totter; Du. wicken, to vibrate; E. wink; Du. wiket, wincket, a wicket, or little door moving easily to and fro; E. dial. which, lively, quick; whicks, quickgrass.

Quid. A piece of tobacco rolled about in the mouth like a cow chewing the cud, in some parts called chewing the quid. Quide, or cud, the inner part of the throat in beasts.—B. See Cud.
Quiddity.—Quiddit. Mid.Lat. quidditas, the whatness or distinctive nature of a thing, brought into a by-word by the nice distinctions of the schools. Quiddity or quiddit, a subtilty or nice refinement.—Nares.
By some strange quiddit or some wretched clause, To find him guilty of the breach of laws. Drayton's Owl in N. It. quidditativo, full of quiddities, quirks, or wranglings, also obscurely doubtful.—Fl.
Quiescent.—Quiet. Lat. quies, rest, whence quiesco, quietum, to take rest.
Quill. Quylle, stalke, calamus.—Pr. Pm. G. kiel, quill, stalk, narrow water-pipe, shaft of lance; kegel, a cone, nine-pin, peg; Da. kogle, kongel, a fir-cone; Swab. kengel, a quill, stalk, icicle; lilien-kengel, a lily stalk. MHG. kil, quill, stalk; kil, G. keil, wedge; Fr. quille, a skittle, the keel of a ship. As the distaff is described by Hupel (Esthon. Dict.) as the ' kegel oder stock' on which the flax to be spun is bound, the foregoing forms may be identified with W. cogel, a distaff or truncheon; Bret. kegel, kigel, a distaff (commonly a reed—Legonidec); Gael. cuigeal. Lap. kåkkel, Pol. kadziel, Boh. kuzel, distaff; kuzelaty, conical; kuzelka, a skittle. The ON. köngull, N. kokle, kugia, kugle, a fir-cone, lead to G. kunkel, distaff. Whence Mid.Lat. concula, It. conocchia, Fr. quenouille.
The primitive signification, as in the case of many words signifying pointed objects, would seem to be a splinter or fragment split off from a mass of wood or stone. Fr. esquazille, escaille, a scale, pieces of wood wherewith crannies left between stones in building are filled up; mur escaille, a wall full of cracks or chinks; escaillures de pierre, shards or spalls, small pieces broken or hewed from stones; esquille, a little scale or splint of a broken bone.—Cot. E. dial. squails, ninepins. Squails were also the sticks or pieces of cleft wood used in cock-throwing. Fr. quille also can only have the sense of chip in the expression trousser son sac et ses quilles, to pack up his sack and his chips, to be compared with Du. zijne spillen pakken (E. spill, splinter, chip), or, as we say, to pick up his orts (or droppings), to take himself off. It. squillo was formerly used in the sense of spillo, properly a splinter, then the vent-peg of a cask, the hole itself, or the gimlet by which it is bored. Diciamo spillare la botte, per assaggiarla, traendole non per la cannella il vino, ma per lo spillo, cioè piccol pertugio fatto con instrumento detto anch' egli spillo, e dagli antichi squillo.—La Crusca. G. spule, Pl.D. spole, a quill, is identical with E. spall, speal, &c., splinter, fragment. From the sense of a splinter, or split piece of wood, the passage is easy to that of a wedge, or anything wedge-shaped or tapering, a cone, ninepin, the pointed end of a feather, whence probably the name of keel is applied to the backbone of a ship, from which the ribs and planking are given off on either side like the web from the stalk of a feather.
Quillet. Why may not this be the skull of a lawyer? where be his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks?—Hamlet.
Notwithstanding Nares' objection that the scholastic term was quodlibet, and not quidlibet, the derivation from this source is probably correct. It. quilibetto, a quidlibet.—Fl. Fr. quodlibet, a low joke, play upon words. A quodlibet was a question in the schools where the person challenged might choose his side. Quodlibetum, quia quod libet defenditur.—Vossius.
Many positions seem quodlibetically constituted, and like a Delphian blade will cut on both sides.—Brown, Christian Morals in R.
Quilling. A kind of pleating. Guernsey enquiller, to pleat, gather, wrinkle. ' Au front tout enquilli.' From Fr. cueillir, to gather.—Metivier.
Quilt. See Counterpane.
Quinary.—Quint. Lat. quinque, five; quintus, fifth; quinarius, belonging to the number five.
Quince. Formed from Fr. coignasse, pear-quince, the greatest kind of quince.—Cot. Coing, It. cotogno, Lat. cotoneum, cydonium, a quince. Quyne-aple tre, coingz.—Palsgr. 914.
Quinsy. Fr. squinance, the squinancie or squinzie.—Cot. Lat. cynanche a bad kind of sore throat; Gr. Κυνάγχη, literally a dog-throttling.
Quintain. A game in which the fun was to see the player tumbled off his horse. ' At last they agreed to set up a quinten which is a crossbar turning upon a pole having a broad board at the one end and a bag full of sand at the other. Now he that ran at it with the lance, if he hit not the board, was laughed to scorn ; and if he hit it full and rid not the faster, he would have such a blow with the sandbag on the back as would sometimes beat them off their horses.'—Essex Champion (1690), in Nares. 'The speciality of the sport was to see how sum for his slakness had a good bob with the bag, and sum for his haste to toppl doun right, and cum tumbling to the post.'—Kenilworth Illustrated, in N. Lang. tintaino, tinteino, a similar game, in which persons tilted against each other, placed on a bowsprit at the end of boats, from which the least shock precipitated them into the water ; 'ce qui est le principal divertissement de ces sortes de fêtes.' Fa la tintaino, chanceler, perdre l'équilibre et culbuter dans l'eau. Fr. tintin, the ringing of a bell ; It. tentennare, to ding-dong, dingle, tingle, jangle, gingle, also to vacillate, stagger, waver. In Florence boys tilt at a gourd hung to a string and call it tintana.—Vanzoni.

Quip. A jibe, jeer, or flout.—B. Properly a cut, a smart stroke. W. chwip, a quick turn or flirt ; chwipio, to whip, to move briskly. Gael. cuip, a whip, lash, trick. ON. hvipp, saltus, celer cursus ; hvipp inn og hvapp inn, in and out, here and there. Du. Het is maar quip, it is only a joke.

Quire. 1. Fr. chœur, Lat. chorus, a choir or band of singers.
2. Fr. quaier (Roquef.), cayer, cahier, a quire of written paper. There is no reason to doubt that it is formed from Lat. quaternio, analogous to Rouchi quayire, kayire, a seat, from cathedra, or quarry, from quadraria. Assit ei (scriptori) quaternio [glossed quaer.].—Neccham in Nat. Antiq. Sp. quaderno, four sheets of paper stitched together ; duerno, two sheets so stitched. Du. quatern, catern, a few sheets stitched together ; Fr. cahier, a copy-book. OE. quair, a book. Diez suggests a derivation from a supposed codicarium.

-quire, -quis-. Lat. quæro, quæsitum (in comp. -quiro, -quisitum), to ask, to seek, to labour to get, to procure. Quærere victum, to get one's living. Hence Acquire, Inquire, Require. Exquiro, to search out, to inquire diligently; exquisitus, much searched for, exquisite.

Quirk. A shift, or cavil.—B. Properly a quick turn. E. dial. quirk, to turn.
And by the barn side we saw many a mouse Quirking round for the kernels that littered about.—Clare in Mrs Baker.

Quit.—Quite.—Bequite.—Acquit.

The Lat. quietus, at rest, was specially applied to the sense of free from any claim of another party. 'Et accepi pretium ego venditor a te emptore meo—et finitum pretium testor apud me habere, ita tamen ut omnibus temporibus securus et quietus maneas.' 'Libera et quieta in perpetuam eleemosynam tenenda.'
Hence It. quieto, queto, a discharge from legal claims ; quetare, to discharge, absolve, acquit. Quietum clamare, to quit claim, was to acknowledge another to be freed from the demands of the speaker. Acquietare was sometimes used in the sense of quieting the demands of a debtor, viz., by paying his debt or discharging his claim. 'Tenentur hæredes testamenta patrum—servare et debita eorum acquietare.' Hence simply to pay. 'Petitum est ut Clerus adquietaret novem millia marcarum.' Hence to quite or requite a service is to pay it back, to discharge the obligation incurred, to quiet the claims to which it gave rise. A quit rent, quietus redditus, is a rent paid in money in discharge of services which would otherwise be due. The adverb quite, or quitely as it was formerly written, signifies absolutely, discharged from any condition which would interfere with the full meaning of the term to which it is applied.
Lo here this Arcite and this Palamon That quitely weren out of my prison, And might have lived in Thebes really. Chaucer.

Quiver. OFr. quivre, G. köcher, Dan. koger, Mod.Gr. κοκκουρον, It. coccaro, quiver ; Du. koker, case ; messen-, boog-, pijl-koker, a knife-, bow-, arrow-case, or quiver. Koker van den mast, the receptacle in which the mast is stepped. Fin. kukkaro, a purse.
David prit les armes d'or et les quivers d'or.—Livre des Rois.

To Quiver. To shiver or shake.—B. Related to quaver as quick to quake, and parallel in sense and form to Lat. vibrare. The formally equivalent Sp. quebrar signifies to break, an idea the connection of which with that of shaking is shown by the expression of breaking a thing to shivers. Du. kuyven, kuyveren, huyveren, to shiver, tremble.—Kil. From the figure of moving to and fro, quiver was used in the sense of active, lively.
Thy quick and quiver wings.—Turberville.
Simeon—of body feeble and impotent, but of soul quiver and lusty.—Udal in R.

Quoin. Lat. cuneus, a wedge.
Quoit. E. dial. coit, to toss, to throw; Sc. coit, as Fr. cottir, to butt or strike with the horns.
If thou dost not use these grape-spillers as thou dost their pottle pots, quoit them down-stairs three or four at a time.—Wilkins in R.
I coyte, I play with a coyting-stone.—Palsgr. The radical sense of tossing or hurling through the air seems preserved in Fin. kuutta, a quoit; kuutilo, a shut-tlecock; kuutilo-kiwi (kiwi, stone), a white pebble, a chuckie-stane.
Quorum. A selection from enumerated persons whose presence is required to authorise the proceedings. From the form of the appointment in Law Latin: A B, CD, E F, &c., of whom (quorum) A B, CD, &c., shall always be one. Or, of whom at least such a number shall always be present, &c.
Quota.—Quotient. Lat. quot, how many; quotiens, quoties, how often.
To Quote. To cite or note with chapter and verse. Lat. quot, how many; quotus, what in number.
Quoth. The terms significative of much or idle talking are commonly taken from the sound of dabbling in water, or from the chattering or cackling of birds. Then, as the image from which a designation is taken is commonly a caricature of the thing ultimately signified, the term which originally signified much talking is applied to talking in general. Thus Du. lellen, to tattle, seems to point out the origin of Gr. λαλειν, to speak, while E. prate shows an earlier acceptation of the word than Gr. φράζειν.
The sound of dabbling in the wet is represented in G. by the syllables quatsch, or matsch. Quatsch-nass, so wet as to give a sound, like water in the shoes, for instance. In dem dreck herum quatschen, to tramp through the dirt. Quatscheln, to dabble.—Westerwald. Matsch und quatsch, slush, soft mud, also senseless chatter. Das ist lauter quitsch quatsch was du sagst. Quatschen, to chatter.
With slight variation, Pl.D. quaddern, to dabble—Brem. Wtb., Dan. quadder, soft mud, the quacking of ducks, or their snubbling in the wet, and according to Diefenbach, chatter, tattle. In Harzgebirg and Saterland, quaddern, to chatter foolishly; Brunsw. koddern, to tattle, to talk; Cimbr. koden, koden, to speak or say. We arrive at the same end from forms representing the chirping or chattering of birds. Westerwald quitschern, Sw. quittre, Dan. quiddre, Du. quedelen, to twitter, warble—Kil., quetteren, to chirp, warble, prattle. The connection between the piping of birds and the high tones of complaint or song lead to Sw. quida, to lament, to cry; quæda, to sing; OSax. quithean, to lament; ON. queda, to sing, to recite, to say, to re-sound; AS. cwathan, Goth. quitha, to say; w. chwedlai, gossip, tattle; chwedl, report, news, a saying, story; chwedleua, to chatter, to talk, or discourse. Thieves' cant, whids, words; to whiddle, to tell tales, to inform.—Grose.
Quotidian. Lat. quotidianus; quotidie, day by day; quot diebus.

Rabbit. Rabet, young cony.—Pr. Pm. Central Fr. rabotte. Wall. robett, Du. robbe, robbeken, a rabbit. Fr. rabouillère, a rabbit burrow, a hole.
To Rabbit. To channel boards. To rebate, to channel, chamfer.—B. Rabat, an yron for a carpentar, rabot. Rabettyng of bordes, rabetture. I plane as a joiner dothe with a plane or rabatte.—Palsgr. Fr. rabot, a plane. The radical image is a broken, rattling sound, represented by Fr. rabalter, rabaster, rabâter (Jaubert), to rumble, rattle, clatter, whence raboteux, rugged, rough, uneven, and raboter, to remove the unevennesses, to plane. In the same way, from Du. hobbelen, to stutter, to jog, and thence hobbelig, rough, uneven, we are led to G. hobeln, to plane. From Du. rouw, rough; het laken rouwen, to take away the roughness from cloth, to comb cloth. The expression of the idea of roughness from the figure of a rattling sound is shown in Du. rampelen, to rumble, rattle, rompelig, rough, uneven.
Rabble. Du. rabbelen, to gabble, garrire, blaterare, precipitare sive confundere verba—Kil.; rabbel-taal, gibberish, jargon. Swiss räbeln, to clatter, make a disturbance; rablete, gräbel, an uproar.

crowd of people, noisy disturbance ; rabelkilth, a loose assembly of young people. Lat. rabulare, to bawl, make a noise ; It. rabulare, to prattle, scold, to rabble, to huddle.—Fl. Swab. rapplen, to talk quick and unclearly, to be wrong in the head.
The original sense is a noisy confusion of voices, then a noisy crowd.
Thus, Father Travis, you may see my rashness to rabble out the scriptures without purpose, rime, or reason.—Fox in R.
And after all the raskall many ran Heaped together in rude rabblement.—F. Q.
See Rubbish, Rammel.
Rabid. Lat. rabidus; rabies, madness.
Race. Used in several senses, which may, however, all be derived from the figure of violent action or rapid movement.
In this fundamental signification we have OE. race, to dash, to tear.
His bannerman Wallace slew in that place. And soon to ground his baner down he race. Wallace in Jam.
And in her swounde so sadly holdith she Her childrin two, whan she gan them embrace, That with grete slight and grete difficulte The childerne from her armes they gan to race. Clerk's Tale, 2124.
OFr. esracer, esracher, Fr. arracher, OE. arace, to pluck off, pull down. Erased (in Heraldry), anything violently torn off from its proper place.—B. A race, or dash with the pen, liture, rature ; to race out (to strike out), rayer, effacer.—Cot. G. reissen, to rage, to tear, to snatch. Der wind reisst, tobet, brauset, rages, roars ; reisst die ziegel von den dächern, hurls down the tiles from the roofs. Jemanden nieder reissen, to dash one to the ground ; sich reissen, to rush, move along with a swift force, to tear along. Ein reissender Strom, a violent current. Riss, a cut or blow with a stick, a rent, a draught, sketch. Pol. raz, a stroke, blow, cut ; Fin. raasia, to scratch, to tear ; AS. hreosan, reosan, ON. hrasa, properly to move with a noise, to rush, to fall ; AS. mycelum ræse, with great violence. A race is then a rapid course, whether of horses or of waters, or, with the signification softened down, simply course, the current of events.
Bot gif yee weigh the mater weill and consider the race of the history.—Bruce in Jam.
ON. rás, a rapid course ; rás hesta, cursus equorum ; rásir dægra, cursus dierum ; vats rás, a watercourse, outlet of waters. N. raas, course, stream ; ræsa, to go straight forwards, to stream, flow in abundance.
The sense of a violent current of water is exemplified in Venet. roza, Prov. rasa, OFr. rase, a mill-race, the stream which turns a mill, the characteristic feature of which is the tail-race or agitated part below the wheel, though the name is extended to the tranquil conduit above.
Another application is to currents produced by the conflict of tides in the sea, as the Race of Alderney, of Pentland.
Thai raysyt saile and furth thai far. And by the mole thai passyt yar. And entrit som into the rase, Quhar that the stremys sa sturdy war. Barbour in Jam.
Du. raes, æstuarium.—Kil. Rase, as the Rase of Bretayne, ras.—Palsgr. Race, in the sense of breed, lineage, line of descent, Fr. race, It. razza, Sp. raza, has been commonly derived from Sp. and OFr. raiz, root, as signifying the root or stock of the family.
Bon burjon de bon raiz Et de haut père vaillant fiz. Chron. Norm. v. 12738.
But probably Diez is right in rejecting that derivation and connecting the word with OHG. reiz, reiza, a line, in accordance with Wal. tir, race, compared with Fr. tière, line, row ; or AS. tuddor, race, compared with Du. tudder, tuyer, tether, strap, row ; or with Pl.D. toom, strap, also progeny, race. He might however have found a form more nearly connected in OE. race, a dash or stroke with the pen, the simplest type of a line. Sp. raza is not only race, but a ray or line of light.
A Race of ginger is OFr. raiz, root. It is written rasyn of ginger in Pr. Pm. Fr. racine de gengimbre.
To Rack. I. To rack wines is to decant, to draw them off the lees. Lang. araca le bi, transvaser le vin. From drâco or râco, dregs, the husks and solid remnants after pressing wine or oil. So from Venet. morga, lees of oil ; morgante, travasatore di olio.—Boerio. Fr. raque, dirt, mire ; vin raqué, small or coarse wine squeezed from the dregs of the grapes.—Cot. Rache de goudron, dregs of pitch. Fr. bourras, silk-rash (Cot.), i. e. the dregs of silk.
2. To strain, to stretch. Du. rekken, G. recken, to stretch. To rack one's brains is to strain them ; rack rent is rent strained to the uttermost.
You find it necessary to say as we say, and are afterwards to rack and strain invention to find out some subtle and surprising meaning for it.—Waterland in R.

Rack. 1. An instrument for stretch-ing. These bows were bent only by a man's imme-diate strength without the help of any bender or rack.—Wilkins in Worcester.
As the stretcher of a cross-bow was provided with a series of teeth which held the string while it was gradually drawn onwards, the name of rack- or ratchet-work is given to a row of teeth into which the cogs of a wheel work.
2. Du. racke, reck-banche, a frame on which torture was inflicted by stretching the joints ; recken, racken, to stretch, to torture.—Kil. G. recken, to stretch ; einen verbrecher auf der folterbank recken, to put a criminal to the rack ; Sw. sträcka, to stretch ; sträck bank, the rack.
3. A receptacle for hay formed of a range of upright bars, and generally the name seems to be given to any set of linear things fixed parallel to each other like the teeth of a comb or rake. A plate-rack is a frame for holding plates, com-posed, like a hay-rack, of upright bars.
The term is then extended to frames for holding other things in which the charac-teristic feature of upright bars is lost, as in a bottle-rack. Pl.D. rakk, a book-stand ; theerakk, glaserakk, a stand for tea-things or glasses ; klederrakk, a row of pegs for hanging clothes on. Du. reke, regge, a rake or comb—Biglotton ; rak, rek, a dresser, clothes-horse.—Halma.
On the same principle, Fr. ratelier, a rack for hay, from rateau, Lat. rastellum, a rake, while G. raufe, an implement like a large comb, used in separating flax from the seeds, is also used in the sense of a hay-rack.
4. The drift of the sky. The winds in the upper region which move the clouds above, which we call the rack.—Bacon in R.
Sw. wræka, ON. reka, to drive ; rek, drift, motion. Isinn er i reki, the ice is driving ; skyrek, the rack or drifting clouds.
Three glorious suns, each one a perfect sun, Not separated by the racking clouds.—H. VI. sometimes confounded with reek, a mist, or vapour.
They must needs conceit that death reduces us to a pitiful thin pittance of being, that our sub-stance is in a manner lost, and nothing but a tenuous reek remains.—More's Immortality of the Soul.
Rack.—Rackel. Rack, in the expres-sions gone to rack, rack and ruin, is to be understood in the sense of crash,
RAFFLE. breakage ; gone to smash. Sc. rak, crash, uproar.
They met in mellé with ane felloun rak, Quhill schaftis all to schudderis with many crak. D. V. 386, 14.
From the rutis he it lousit (the roik) and rent, And tumblit doun fra thyne or he wald stent—The river wod affrayit with the rak. And demmit with the routis ran abak. D. V. 249. 31.
Boh. rochati, to make a crash ; Fin. räck-kid, cum strepitu concutio, fragorem edo.
E. dial. rackle, to rattle. From this source seems to spring OE. rakyl, rackle, impetu-ous, unbridled, rash.
Racket. Noise as of things knocking about, disturbance. Sc. rack, crash, shock ; Rouchi raque, expression repre-senting the noise made in striking the hands together. Boh. rachotiti, to make a noise ; rachoceni, crash, noise. Gael. rac, to tear, sound as things tearing ; ra-caid, noise, disturbance, blow on the ear.
To racket about is to move noisily about, and hence the name of racket was given to the game of tennis, in which the ball is violently driven to and fro, and ultimately to the bat or racket, Fr. ra-quette, used in striking the ball.
And though I might, yet I would not do so. But canst thou plaien racket to and fro, Nettle in, dock out, now this, now that, Pan-dare ?—Chaucer, Thus like a tennis ball is poor man racketed from one temptation to another.—Dr Hewet in R.
Racy. Flavorous, pungent.—Worces-ter. Race and raciness in wine signifies a kind of tartness.—Blackstone in R.
Brisk racy verses.—Cowley.
The radical meaning of the word is that of Fr. piquant, inciting, appetising, from G. reizen, Sw. reta, to provoke, entice, allure. Reta smaken, piquer le gout ; retande, charming, appetising. Bav. rassen, incitare ; rass, Swab. ress, sharp in taste, pungent ; zapf-rasser wein, wine fresh from the tap ; der rassling, agari-cus deliciosus.—Schm. OHG. räzer win, racy wine. Swiss räss, sharp, cutting, astringent ; rässes messer, rässer wind, rässe lauge.
Radiant.—Radiate. Lat. radio, to send out rays or beams of light. See Ray.
Radical. Lat. radix, the root.
Radish. Fr. radis, Walach. rädike, It. radice, G. rettig, from Lat. radix, root.
Raffle. It. raffio, a hook, or drag ; raffolare, to rake, drag, scrape together by hook or crook, to rifle for.—Fl. Raffolaruffola, riffraff, by hook or crook. Fr. rafler, to scrape or scratch, to catch or seize on violently; faire une rafle, to rifle, sweep all away before them; jeter une rafle, to throw three dice alike, as three aces, &c., to win all. ON. hrafla, to scrape together; It. arraffare, to grab; G. raffen, to rake together, to take away everything by force and violence; Piedm. rafa, G. raffgut, spoil, pillage.
To raff was formerly used in our own language in the sense of scraping or raking.
Now that churchales ought to be sorted in the better ranks of these twaine may be gathered from their causes and effects, which I thus raffe up together.—Carew in R.
Hence raff, riffraff, scraping, scum, refuse, the refuse of society; raff (like rake), a debauched, unprincipled person. In another application, raff is a scraping together, a confused heap.
The Synod of Trent [was called] to settle a raff of errors and superstitions.—Barrow in R.
Raft.—Rafter. A raft is a float made of spars of wood. Raff-merchant, a timber merchant.—Brockett. Rafter, a piece of timber for building—B., but especially one of the spars of a roof. ON. raftr, a pole, stake, small beam; Dan. raft, a long thin piece of timber, spar, lath, pole; humleraft, a hop pole. Fris. rafte, dach-raff, a lath; Swab. raf, rafen, a spar, especially roof spar; Bav. rafen, the roof spar, also young stem of tree fit to make a rafter. Rafuun, capriuns; ravo, tignus, luctans, asser.—Gl. in Schm.
The name is probably connected, as Outzen suggests, with Fris. rabb, Du. ribb, ribbe, Sw. ref, a rib, from the rib-like appearance of the timber used in roofing.
Rag. The primary meaning is probably a jag or projecting piece, the word being formed on precisely the same principle as jag or shag. Sw. ragg, long coarse hair, like that of goats; raggig, shaggy; Dan. rage, to project; Lith. ragas, horn, projecting corner, tooth of a wheel. The radical image seems to be a harsh broken sound, the representation of which is applied in a secondary sense to signify an abrupt, reciprocating movement, the path traced out during such a movement, or finally, a single element of that path, an abrupt projection.
My voice is ragged, I know I cannot please you. As You Like It. In the original sense. It. ragghiare, to bray like an ass, to make a harsh broken sound; rugghiare, to roar; Swiss ragg-gen, to make harsh disagreeable sounds in speaking or singing; raggig, hoarse; Esthon. raggisema, to crackle; Magy. regetni, rekegni, to croak; Dan. rægle, to rattle in the throat. Then passing to the idea of motion, Sw. raggla, to totter, to make zigzags; ragglande, zigzags.—Nordforss. N. rigga, rigla, rugga, rugla, to rock, waver, hang loose. Da. dial. rægle, rigle, torn hanging rag, tatter; raggeret, ragged. Gael. rag, stiff, rigid, also a rag, a wrinkle; ragach, ragged, wrinkled.
AS. hracod, torn; Gael. rac, to tear; racadh, act of tearing, or of sounding as cloth in the act of tearing, seem radically distinct notwithstanding the similarity of meaning.
Rage. Lat. rabies. It. rabbia, Sp. Prov. rabia, Ptg. rabia, ravia, Sicilian raggia, Fr. rage, rage. Ptg. raivar, Prov. raviar, raujar, ratjar; enrabiar, enrapjar, enrat-jar, to rage.
The radical image is probably the senseless utterance of a madman. Du. rabbelen, to gabble; G. rappeln, to rattle; Swab. rapplen, to speak in a quick and confused way, to be cracked in the head.—Schmid. See Rave.
Ragout. A highly seasoned dish. Fr. ragouter, to restore the appetite, from gout, Lat. gustus, taste; ragout, sauce to stimulate the appetite and restore the taste for food.—Trevoux.
Rail. I. A bar or strip of wood, metal, &c. A word of diminutive or frequentative form, from It. riga, a streak, line, ruler; Prov. rega, a line, furrow; Piedm. riga, a line, ledge, rod, thin slip of wood, ruler; Pl.D. rige, rege, a row or string. From forms like these we pass to Du. regel, a row or line; Pl.D. regel, G. riegel, a bar, bolt, rail; riegelholz, timber for rails or bars. Fr. rayaux [sing. rayal], bars, or long and narrow pieces of metal.—Cot. The Cat. form is ralla, a line, whence passar ralla, to cancel, to be compared with Lat. cancelli, rails. Rouchi roie, line, furrow; roile, line, window- or chimney-shelf. Norm. railer, to score, to draw lines; railette, the division of the hair; roile du dos, the backbone. See Ray.
2. Fr. rasle, râle, Fin. rääkkä, W. cre-genyryd, the rail or corncrake, a bird of peculiar harsh note, represented by the foregoing names. It. ragliare, to bray like an ass; Ptg. ralhar, to grate; Dan. rægle, G. rocheln, Fr. rosier, râler, to rattle in the throat.
3. AS. hrægel, rægel, a garment; nihtes-hrægel, a night-rail, night-clothes; hrægel-hus, vestry. OHG. hragil, indumentum, cothurnus, tropæa, spolia; gihragilon, ornare; anthragilon, exuere. Grisons ragila (in a depreciatory sense), clothes, children's clothes, ragged clothes; rag-liun, a ragged person. Other cases in which the designation of clothes is taken from a rag are given under Hater and Duds.

To Rail. 1. To use opprobrious words. B. Fr. railler, to jest, sport, deride, mock, scoff at.—Cot. Dan. ralle, to rattle; N. ralla, radla, radda, rassa, to tattle, jabber. Da. dial. ralde, ralle, to rattle, to talk idly. 'Jeg troer du raller,' you are joking, said to one who tells an improbable story. Du. rallen, rellen, blaterare, garrire, jocari.—Kil. Pl.D. rallen, to make a great noise as children playing, to sound as the waves beating on the shore.—Brem. Wtb.

2. To trickle, as tears, or blood from a wound.
The purple drops down railed purple red. Fairfax in R.
From the unsteady trembling movement of trickling drops. Du. rillen (for rid-delen—Weiland), trillen, grillen, to tremble, shiver. To trill, it will be observed, is also used in the sense of to trickle. Fr. griller, to shiver, also to trickle, steal, run glib along.—Cot.

Raiment. See Array.

Rain. AS. regn, regn, ren, G. regen, Fris. rein, Goth. rign.

To Raise. To cause to rise. Goth. urreisan, —rais, —risun, to stand up; raisjan, urraisjan, to raise, to rouse. ON. reisa, to go, to excite, to raise. At reisa flock, to raise tumult; —hús, to build a house; —fœtr, to set up. Risa, to rise.
The primary origin is probably rasa, to go straight forwards, to rush, to move with violence; ras, precipitancy, fall. AS. reosan, hreosan, to rush, to fall. See Race.

Raisin. Fr. raisin, Prov. razim, razain, grape, Lat. racemus, Sp. racimo, a bunch of grapes.

Rake. 1. From the noise of raking or scraping. Bret. raka, graka, to make noise in rubbing a hard and rough body, to cluck, croak; Gael. ràc, rake, harrow, make a noise like geese or ducks. ON. raka, to scrape. Sw. raka, to shave, to make a disturbance; rakande, noise, disturbance. Fr. racler, to scrape, rasp, grate, rake. Du. raeckelen, raecken, to rake. Maori ràkuràku, to scrape or scratch, an implement to scrape with, a rake, small hoe.

2. In the sense of a dissipated person RAKEHELL 517 or profligate, is commonly supposed to be a contraction from rakehell, but in the first instance it may have signified nothing worse than noisy merry-making.
Than all thay leuche upon loft with laiks full mirry, And raucht the cop round about full of ryche wynis, And raiket lang, or thay wald rest, with ryatus speiche.—Dunbar in Jam.
Bret. raka is used of many kinds of importunate noise, to cackle like a fowl, to croak, and figuratively to babble, tattle. Swed. raka, to riot about; rakande, rioting, disturbance, noise. Dessa kattorna hafwa rakat der förfärligen hela natten igenom: these cats have kept a horrible racket all night through. Raka omkring, to rove about.—Widegren. Racka, to run about. Racka beständigt fram och tilbaka, to keep running to and fro; racka omkring hela Paris, to run about all Paris. To rake, to gad or ramble idly—Forby; to rove or run about wildly as children.—Mrs Baker.
And right as Robartes men raken aboute At feyres and at full ales, and fyllen the cuppe.
P. P. Crede, 143.
Sc. raik, to range, wander, rove at large. A lang raik, a long extent of way; sheep-raik, a sheep-walk.
The radical notion may probably be a sweep or rapid movement over a surface. Sw. raka af, to run off, to brush away; rak, straight; Craven raik, raitch, a streak, scratch; Du. recken, strecken, to stretch; streke, a stroke, streak, extent, tract, course; Sw. strek, a dash, stroke, streak, line; Sc. straik, to rub gently, to stroke, to spread butter or plaister; a straik, an extent of country; a lang straik, a long excursion on foot; upd' straik, in motion, in a state of activity.
With sterne staves and stronge thei over lond straketh.—P. P. Creed.
Lolieres lyvynge in sleuthe, and over lond stryken. P. P. G. "streichen, to rub, to stroke, to sweep along, move rapidly along or away, to wander, ramble, rove, or run about, to extend in length. Sw. stryka, to stroke, rub, wipe, move along. Stryka omkring, to rove about; —förbi, to graze, to shave; —ut, to strike out, draw a line through writing to efface it.

Rakehell. Rendered by Minsheu, taugenichts, furcifer; a profligate, the scrapings of hell.
Such an ungracious couple [Domitian and Commodus] as a man shall not find again if he raked all hell for them.—Ascham in R.
On the same principle are formed Pl.D.

höllenbessem, hell-besom (Danneil), Du. helleveeg (veegen, to sweep), terms of abuse, especially for an angry violent woman, a shrew, a vixen. It is sometimes supposed that rakehell is a mere corruption of Fr. racaille, the base and rascal sort, the dregs or offals of any company.—Cot., a word signifying simply scrapings, off-scourings, from Bret. raka, Pl.D. raoken, to scrape; as rascal, from It. rascare; Fr. raspaille, Du. raep-alje, the scum of the people, from It. raspare, Fr. râper, Du. raepen, to scrape. And doubtless the two words were confounded in our older writers, and rakehell written where only rascal is meant.

And far away amid their rakehell bands They spied a lady left all succourless.—F. Q.

In record whereof I scorn and spew out the rakehelly rout of our ragged rhymers.—Spenser in R.

The confusion is increased by the resemblance in sound and meaning of the OE. rakel, rackyl, impetuous, unbridled, passionate.

The jolly woes, the hateless short debate, The rakehell life, that longs to love's disport. Surrey in R.

See Rack, Rackle.

To Rally. 1. Fr. railler. See Rail.

2. Fr. rallier (Lat. religare), to re-assemble, re-unite, gather dispersed things together.—Cot. Rouchi raloier, to put together the bits of a broken thing.

Eftsoones she thus resolved— Before they could new counsels realize.—F. Q.

Ram. Du. ram, Bav. ramm, rammer, G. ramm, rammen, rammel, the male sheep. Commonly derived from the strong smell of the animal. E. dial. ram, acrid, fetid; Dan. ram, rank in smell or taste, as old cheese, or a he-goat; ON. andramr, one whose breath smells ill. But it is more probable that the word is a special application of a general term signifying originally the male of animals, from OHG. rammalon, G. rammeln, to cover the female, said of sheep, hares, rabbits, cats, &c.; rammler, the male of such kind of animals; mhg. rammelære, a ram; rammelærin, dissoluta virgo.

See To Ramble.

To Ram. To strike like a ram with his head, to thrust in. So Dan. bukke, to ram, from buk, a buck or he-goat, an animal equally prone with a ram to butting with the head. At rammepæle ned, at bukke pæle, to drive in piles. Ramnbuk, a rammer. Lat. aries, a battering-ram.

Ramage. Fr. espervier ramage, a brancher, a ramage hawk.—Cot. ramage, boughs, branches, of or belonging to branches; also ramage, haggard, wild, homely, rude.—Cot. It. ramo, a branch; ramigno, branchy; ramingo; ramengo, a ramage hawk.

Ramas. In Pembrokeshire a rigmarole, a string of nonsense. Dan. ramse, remse, string of unmeaning words, rigmarole; at lære paa ramse, to learn by rote. At ramse noget op, to repeat a thing in a monotonous way without reference to sense, to say by rote. Sw. en lang ramsa af ord, une kyrielle de mots.—Nordforss.

Sc. rammes, to roar, rame, to cry aloud, to roar; rame, a cry, especially when the same sound is repeated. ' He has ay ane rame, when he continues to cry for the same thing, or to repeat the same sound.—Jam. Fr. ramas, a heap, medley, mingle-mangle, probably belongs to this head, signifying originally a confused noise.

Cette histoire n'est qu'un ramas d'impostures. Fr. ramage, the song of birds, chatter of children, is another shoot from the same stock. Quel ramage font ces enfans la! Rabâcher, to make a tedious repetition.

To Ramble. 1. The syllables ram, rom, rum, are used in a numerous class of words framed to represent continued multifarious noise, clatter, and then applied to the sense of noisy, riotous, excited action. We may cite E. dial. rame, to cry aloud; Lat. rumor, murmur, noise, confused sound; It. rombare, rombazzare, rombeggiare, rombolare, to rumble, clash, clatter; G. rumor, a noise, bustle, clamour, tumult, commotion; Westerwald rammoren, Austrian romotten, Hamburgh rammeln, to make a clatter, make a disturbance; E. dial. rammaking, behaving riotously and wantonly; ramracketing, a country rout where there are many noisy amusements; Sw. ramla, to rattle; Du. rammelen, to rattle, chink, clash. De rammeling der wapenen, the clash of weapons; met geld rammelen, to clink with money. Rammelen is then applied to tumultuous, noisy action; perstrepere, tumultuari.—Kil. Mit jungen mägden rammeln, to sport with girls; sich im bette rammeln, to rout about in bed. 'Tanzen und rammeln.' 'Ball spielen, laufen und rammeln.'—Sanders. Next from the excited action of animals pairing, G. rammeln is specially applied to the pairing of animals, as hares, rabbits, cats, sheep. The wild conduct of hares under this influence is witnessed by the proverb, 'as mad as a March hare.' 'Wenn die hasen rammeln, so jagen sie einander herum.' 'Der im März rammelndn kät-zen.'—Sanders. Du. rammelen, lascivire, catulire, efferari libidine, et domo relictâ, vagari.—Kil. Rammeler, a male rabbit, and a libidinous man, a sense in which E. rambler also is vulgarly used. Sc. ram-mis, to go about in a state approaching to frenzy under the impulse of any powerful appetite; to rammis about like a cat, to be rammising with hunger.—Jam. The sense of wandering up and down is derived from the notion of noisy move-ment, disturbance, agitation. Du. ram-melen, rommelen, strepere, turbare; rom-melen (inquit Becanus) robustè et cele-riter sursum deorsum, ultro citroque se movere.—Kil.

In his sieve—he had a silver teine, Heslily tokeit out this cursid heine,— And in the pannes bottom he it lafte, And in the water rambled to and fro, And wonder privily toke up also The copper teine.—Canon Yeoman's Tale. The people cried and rombled up and doun. Monk's Tale.

The same train of thought is shown in N. rangla, to rumble, tinkle, to revel, riot, to ramble, wander about; Dan. ralde, to rattle; N. ralla, to tattle; of beasts, to rut, to be on heat, also to ramble or gad about.

2. To ramble, in the sense of being delirious, talking in an incoherent way, is probably not from the figure of wandering in speech, but from the primitive sense of rattling, clattering; Sw. ramla, to clatter, to tattle, analogous to Sc. clash applied to idle talk; Du. rammelen, to talk idly, loosely, confusedly, rabbelen, kakelen—Halma; remelen, delirare, ineptire.—Kil. Comp. rallen, rellen, strepere, garrire, blaterare, deliramenta loqui.—Kil.

Ramify. Lat. ramus, a bough or branch.

Rammel.—Rubble.—Rubbish. Ram-mel, rubbish, especially bricklayer's rub-bish, stony fragments. To rammel or moulder in pieces, as sometimes mud walls or great masses of stones will do of themselves.—Florio in Hal. Sw. rammel, rattle, clatter; rammel af stenar som falla ur muren, rattle of stones falling out of the wall; ramla, to rattle, to fall with a crash. Stenar ramlade af berget, stones rattled down from the moun-tain. Ramla omkull som en mur, to tumble down as a wall. E. dial. rames, ruins, remmants. An old rames of a house.

In the same way from the parallel form Du. rabbelen, to gabble (properly to rattle, as shown in Pl.D. rabbel, bustle—Dan-neil, rabbeltasch, a rattle, a great talker—Schütze), is formed E. rubble, what comes rumbling down, the ruins of old walls. 'Rubbell or brokell of old decayed houses.'—Huloet. 'Rubble, as mortar and broken stones of old buildings.'—Baret. On the same principle Rubbish (com-monly explained as what comes off by rubbing) is from Fr. rabascher, rabaster, rabalter, to rumble, rattle; rabaschement, a rumbling or terrible rattling.—Cot. So from the form rabaster, Lang. rabastos, silk rubbish, remnants of silk spinning. Comp. Pl.D. rabakken, to rattle; een oold rabak, an old ruinous house or fur-niture; a rattle trap. Pl.D. rabusch (pro-nounced as Fr. rabouge), confusion.

To Ramp.—Romp.—Rampage. It is shown under Ramble that the element ram or rom is used to represent noise in a long series of words signifying noisy, riotous, excited action. The radical sense is shown in It. rombare, rombazzare, rom-beggiare, to rumble, clash, clatter; Du. rammelen, to rattle, clash, clink, then in a further developed sense, perstrepere, tumultuari.—Kil. G. rammelen, to rout about, to sport in an excited manner, to caterwaul. The It. rombazzare, rombeg-giare, may be identified with MHG. ram-büeze, spring widely about—Zarncke, and with E. rampage, to be riotous, to scour up and down, rampadgeon, a furious, boisterous, or quarrelsome fellow—Hal., while Hamburgh ramenten, to make a clatter, corresponds to Lincolnsh. ram-pantous, overbearing; and It. rampegare, rampicare, to clamber or grapple, to E. rammaking, behaving riotously and wan-tonly.—Hal. From the syllable ram or ramp, which lies at the root of all these forms, springs the verb to ramp or romp, signifying unrestrained bodily action, throwing about the limbs, scrambling, jumping about, pawing.

And if that any neighebour of mine Wol not in chirche to my wife incline, Or be so hardy to hire to trespace. Whan she cometh home she rampeth in my face, And cryeth, False coward wreke thy wife. Chaucer, Monk's Prologue.

Yet is this an act of a vile and servile mind, to honour a man while he lived—and now that another had slain him, to be in such an exceed-ing jollity withal—as to ramp in manner with both their feet upon the dead, and to sing songs of victory, &c.—North, Plut. in R.

It. rampare, rampegare, rampeggiare, to ramp, clamber, drag, or grapple, to paw like a lion or a bear; Fr. ramper, to climb, to creep.

When Clare speaks of ramping willows, he conceives them as scrambling about, pushing out their limbs in an excessive degree, growing luxuriantly, in the same way that G. rammeln, which when used of children signifies tumbling and tossing about, throwing about the limbs, is also applied to plants in the sense of shoot, spring, sprout.—Sanders.
A ramp or romp is a young person of unrestrained spirits, a girl noisy and boisterous in play. G. Mit jungen Magden rammeln, to toy or romp with girls.
Rampallion. A coarse vulgar person. Devonsh. rumbullion, a great tumult.—Hal. Castrais rambal, confused noise, bustle and movement of a house; rambalha, to disturb, trouble; ramboul, a mess; ramboulha, to disorder, turn topsy-turvy. Comp. Sc. rallion, clattering, noise, with rullion, a coarse masculine woman.—Jam.

Rampart.—Rampire. Fr. rempar, rempart, a rampier, the wall of a fortress; remparer, to fortify.—Cot. It. riparare, to ward off a blow; riparo, a defence, remedy, a rampier, fence, covert, place of refuge.—Fl. See Parry.

Rancour.—Rancid.—Rank. Lat. rancere, It. rancire, to become rank, tainted, or unpleasant in taste or smell. Rancore, rancura, rancour, rage, spite; rancorare, to rancour, fester, rage, rankle.—Fl. Fr. ranci, musty, tainted, unsavoury, ill smelling; rancœur, rancour, hatred, rankling despight.—Cot. CentralFr. rancœur, disgust; ça fait rancœur. Du. ranst, ranstig, G. ransig, rancid.

Random.—Randon. The radical meaning is impetus, violence, force. Randoun, the swift course, flight, or motion of a thing.—Jam.
He rode to him with gret randoum.
Beves of Hampton.
Then rode he este with gret randoune.
MS. in Hal.
The adverb at random is to be explained as left to its own force, without external guidance.
The gentle lady loose at randon left The greenwood long did walk.—F. Q.
Fr. randon, force, violence; de randon, impetuously.—Roquef. Aller à grand randon, to go very fast; sang respandu à gros randons, blood spilt in great gushes.—Cot. Prov. randa, randon, effort, violence. Faitz es lo vers a randa, the verse is made at one effort, at a blow. Las regnas romp a un randon, he breaks the reins at a blow. Cant ac nadat un gran randon, when he had swum a good bit.—Raynouard.

The radical image is the noise which accompanies impetuous action. Fr. ran-tanplan, rubadub, the beating of a drum. Piedm. rabadan, ramadan, Gloucestersh. randan, noise, bustle, uproar. It. randellare, to make a whirling noise, to turn as a whirlwind, to hurl or fling furiously; randello, a violent hurling or whistling noise in the air; a randello, in flinging manner, at random.—Fl. OE. randall, random.—Coles in Hal. Randy, boisterous, noisy, obstreperous. G. randal, noise, uproar.—Sanders. E. dial. ran, violence, force.

Range.—Rank. Fr. rang, reng, renge, Prov. renc, rengua, Cat. renc, Lyonnaise ranche (Gl. Génev.), W. rhenc, Bret. renk, Piedm. ran, rem, row, line, rank; Fr. ranger, to arrange, dispose, set in order; rangée, a rank, row; Prov. rengar, arrengar, arrenjar, It. rangiare, to range or set in order. Sc. raing, roe, line; to raing, to rank up, to be arranged in line; also to go successively in line, to follow in succession. 'The folks are rainging to the kirk.' It. rangiare is used as E. range, in the sense of making stretches up and down. To range along the coast is to move along the line of coast; to range over the country, to stretch over the country in extensive sweeps.
The Britons renged about the field.
R. Brunne, 194.
And in two renges fayre they hem dresse.
Knight's Tale.
Diez' explanation from ring, a circle of listeners, is very unsatisfactory. In a circle there is no priority, which is the ruling idea in rank. It is far more probable that the origin is to be found in a nasalised form of Du. recken, Sw. räcka, to stretch, to reach to. Du. recke, Sw. räcka, rank, line. I en räcka, at a stretch, in a continued line. The range of a gun is as far as the gun will reach. A range of mountains is a stretch or line of mountains, and a reach of a river is an analogous expression, so far as it extends in one direction.

Range. 2. MHG. viur-ram, a fire-grate, kitchen range; G. Rahmen, a frame.

Ranger of a Forest. So called because it is his duty to range up and down in the forest [ad perambulandum quotidie per terras deafforestatas—Manwood] to see to the game, and the duty of the keepers in their several walks.—Minsheu.

The guardians of the forest are termed regardatores, inspectors, in the Charta de Foresta, 9 H. III., rendered rangers in the old translation of the Statutes, while facere regardum is rendered, to make range, or make his range. Now to make range is not an English expression, and certainly is not a translation of facere regardum, to make inspection. It is obviously framed to correspond with the name of the Ranger (by which the officer was known in the time of the translation) in the same way that the phrase facere regardum corresponds to regardator in the original, and therefore cannot be used in support of Minsheu's derivation. The probability is, as it seems to me, that the name of ranger was taken from ramageur, the name by which the guardian of the forest was known in France. The right of cutting branches in the forest for fodder or other purposes, and the duty payable to the lord for the exercise of the right, were called ramage, Mid.Lat. ramagium, from ramus, branch. ' Ego Audiernus dedi B. ramagium per omnes buscos meos in curte de M. ad hoc ut homines de C. accipiant ad omnes necessitates suas.'—Chart. A.D. 1104 in Duc. Hence OFr. ramageur, an officer whose duty it was to look after the woods and to receive the payments on account of ramage. ' Pasturages communs sanz en riens payer au ramageur.'—Chart. A.D. 1378 in Carp. The corruption from ramageur to ranger will cause little difficulty if we compare the Fr. raim, rain, rains, rainche, a branch or stick, derived from ramus. Cut brushwood is still called rangewood, or ringewood, in Northamptonshire.—Mrs Baker.

It would be perfectly natural that the superintendence of the game should be given to the same officer whose business was to look after the woods, and it might easily happen that the former duty might supersede the latter, as in England, where, according to Manwood, the ranger had no care of vert, but only of venison. It is not true however that such was the case with the regardatores of the Forest Charter.

Rank. The adj. rank is used in very different senses, which however may perhaps all be developed from the fundamental notion of violence or impetuosity of action.

The seely man seeing him ride so rank, And aim at him, fell flat to ground for fear. F. Q.

Ah for pity ! will rank winter's rage These bitter blasts never 'gin to assuage ? Shepherd's Cal.

Of many iron hammers beating rank.—F. Q.

From the last quotation we readily pass to the sense of frequent, closely set, ' As rank as motes i' t' sun.'— Craven Gl. And generally the image of vigorous action supplies the senses of strong in body, luxuriant in growth, fully developed, excessive in any quality, strong in taste or smell, harsh in voice, &c.

' In the mene tyme certane wycht and rank men [viribus validiores] take hym be the myddill.'—Bellenden, Boeth. in Jam. ' Seven ears came up on one stalk, rank and good.'—Gen. ' A rank modus.' 'Rank idolatry.' ' The rank vocit swanys.'—D. V.

Precisely analogous senses are expressed by forms springing from the parallel root ramp, ram, representing noisy, excited, violent action, as shown under Ramble, Ramp. ON. rammr, ramr, robust, strong ; r. rymr, a loud noise ; rönnm hildr, a sharp fight ; r. ast, vehement love ; ramr reykr, a sharp smoke ; andramr, of rank breath. In N. of E. ram, fetid. ' He is as ram as a fox.' Strong-tasted butter is said to be rammish.—Craven Gl. N. ram, strong in taste as old cheese, bold in speech, thorough in respect of a bad quality. Ein ram kjuv, Sw. ram tjuf, a rank thief. Sw. ram lukt, rank smell ; ram bonde, as Fr. un franc paysan, a mere boor. Dan. vor ramme alvor, in good earnest ; at tale ram Jydsk, as we should say, to talk rank Cockney.

When frank Mess John came first into the camp, With his fierce flaming sword none was so ramp. Jam.

The term is then applied to the luxuriant growth of plants.

By overshadowed ponds in woody nooks, With ramping sallows lined and crowding sedge. Clare.

E. dial. rammily, tall, rank.—Hal. G. rammeln (of plants), to spring, shoot, sprout.—Sanders. Cimbr. rammele, twig. It. rampollo, a bud, sprig, branch.

With nk or ng instead of mp or m in the radical syllable, as in E. shrink, compared with G. schrimpfen, we have Da. rangle, to rattle, jingle ; N. rangla, to rumble, tinkle, to revel, riot, to wander about ; G. rankelt, rankern, ränkeln (Sanders), rangen (Brem. Wtb.), to sport noisily, run wildly about, tumble about, romp ; ranken (of the sow), to be on heat.

Ranken is also said of plants which cling to or climb up other bodies by means of their filaments. Die gurken ranken auf der erde fort, the cucumbers scramble, ramp, creep, or grow along the ground. Ranke, ranken, a branch, tendril, twining sprigs of vines or hops.—Kütn.
To Ransack. ON. rannsaka, Sw. ran-saka, to search thoroughly, to search for stolen goods. Gael. rannsaich, Manx ronnsee, search, rummage. Ihre explains the first syllable from Goth. razns, ON. ran, a house, comparing the word with Lombard salisuchen (sal, a dwelling), G. haussuchen, Fris. hamsekene, a searching or an attack of a house. It may possibly be from the figure of a hog rooting with his snout. ON. rani, snout of a hog; rannadr, snouted.
Ransom. Fr. rançon, OFr. raançon, raençon, raention—Roquef., from Lat. re-emptio, a purchase back. Redemption is the same word with insertion of the eu-phonic d.

To Rant.—Rantipole. To rant, to rage, rave, or swagger—B.; to drink or riot.—Hal.
Let's drink and riot and merry make. Craven Gl.
Ranty, wild, frisky, riotous. Randy, boisterous, obstreperous, disorderly—Brockett, also lecherous, on heat.—Hal. Luxuriari, gogel sein, rant haben.—Schmeller. G. ransen, ranten, to make a noise, move noisily about; den ganzen tag im hofe herum ranzen; im bette herum ranzen, to rout about. Ranzen in sportsman's language is used of dogs and wild animals on heat. Bav. ranten, to play tricks; sich ranten, to swagger; ju-ranten, to jodel, to cry ju! Swab. rande, jünger rande, a young sportive person; randlen, to sport, muthwillen treiben; rantschen, to ramble idly about; Du. ranzen, to caterwaul, be on heat; randen, randten, delirare, ineptire, insanire.—Kil. In Franconia and Silesia rant is 'noise, uproar,' according to Frisch.
See Ramble, Rank, Romp.

Rap.—Rape.—Rapid. The syllable rap is used in the first instance to represent the sound of a blow or hard knock, and then to signify whatever is done with the violence or quickness of a blow. Rouchi rapasse, a volley of blows; Mod. Gr. παίειν, to smite. Sw. rapp, blow, stroke, and as an adj. prompt, active, operating like a blow. Dan. rap, quick, swift, brisk; rappe dig, make haste.
And Ich comaunde quath the kynge to Conscience thenne, Rappe thee to ryde, and Reson that thou fette. P. P. in R.

RARE OE. rape, haste.
So oft a day I mote thy werkes renew It to correct and eke to rubbe and scrape, And all is thorow thy negligence and rape. Chaucer to his scrivener.
To rap out oaths is to utter them with violence and haste like a volley of blows. Lat. rapere, to seize with violence; rapidus, occupying a short space of time like a blow, quick. Rapt with joy, rapt in admiration, signify carried away with the emotion. Bav. rappen, to snatch. I rappe, I ravysshe.—Palsgr. In rap and ran, to get by hook or crook, to seize whatever one can lay hands on, the word is joined with the synonymous ON. rán, rapine. I rap or rende, je rapine.—Palsgr. To rap and renne.—Chaucer. To get all one can rap and run.—Coles in Hal. ON. rán ok hrifs (hrifs, robbery) is used in the same way. Leida vikin-gum rán ok hrifsan, to thoroughly plunder the vikings. Kilian has raep, collectio, raptura. Manx raip, to rend or tear. See Rend.
Rapacious.—Rapine.—Rapture. Lat. rapio, raptum, to seize, take by violence.

Rape. 1. Fr. râpe, marc de raisin, the stalks and husks of grapes in the wine-press.—Jaubert. Properly the scrapings, refuse. Lang. raspal, a besom; raspalia, to sweep; Du. raepen, colligere, levare, auferre—Kil., raepalie, refuse, rubbish.
2. A division of the County of Sussex. ON. hreppr, N. repp, a district.
3. Fr. rapt, a ravishing or taking by violence; Lat. rapio, raptum.

Rapier. Fr. rapière, a long sword for thrusting, a word commonly used in a depreciatory sense. From Sp. raspadera, a raker (Neum.), demiespadon pour racier (Taboada), as if we called it a poker. Rapière, Spanische sworde.—Palsgr. 908.

Rapparee. A wild Irish plunderer, so named from the raparee or half-pike with which he was armed.—Burnet.
Was it not the priests that were the original of the Rapparees? Did they not enjoin every one upon pain of excommunication to bring a raparee or half-pike in his hand to mass?—Essay for the Conversion of the Irish, Dub. 1698, in N. & Q.
Ir. ropaire, a rapier, doubtless from the E.

Rare. 1.—Rarefy.—Rarity. Lat. rarus, thin, scarce.
Rare. 2. Raw, underdone.—Hal. In the U.S., according to Lowell, rare or raredone is the ordinary term used in that sense. It is well explained by that author (Biglow Papers, II. Series, xxxi.) as a contraction from rather, signifying too quickly done, too soon taken from the fire. The same form is seen in rare ripe, early ripe. Devon rare, early.—Hal. The elision of th between vowels is very common, as in whe'r for whether, smore from smother, or (G. oder) from other, &c.

Rascal. The meaning of rascal is the scrapings and refuse of anything. Rascaly or refuse, whereof it be, caducum.—Pr. Pm. Rascall, refuse beasts.—Palsgr. N. raska, to scrape ; rask, offal, remnants of fish or the like. Sp. rascar, raspar, It. rascare, to scrape.

In like manner from Bret. raka, Fr. racier, râper, Du. raepen, to scrape, are derived Fr. racaille, the rascality, or base and rascal sort, the scum, dregs, offals, outcasts [scrapings] of any company.—Cot., Du. racalie, raepalie, the dregs of the people.—Bigl. Kil. Yorkshire raggaly, villanous.—Hal. Da. rage to rake, scrape ; rageri, trumpery, trash.

The imitative character of the words signifying scraping is shown by their application to the act of hawking or clearing the throat, in which a similar sound is produced. It. raschiare, rastiare, rascare, rassare, to scrape, also to keck hard for to cough or fetch up phlegm from the lungs.—Fl. ON. ræskia, screare cum sonitu. Sp. raspar, to scrape, may be compared with G. räuspern, to hawk ; It. recere, to retch, with G. rechen, to rake ; ON. hrækia, to hawk, with E. rake ; Dan. harke, to hawk, with Du. harcken, to rake ; Ptg. escarrar, to hawk, with G. scharren, to scrape.

Rase. rase. Lat. rado, rasum, to scrape.

Rash. G. rasch, quick, impetuous, spirited. Rasches pferd, a spirited horse ; rascher wind, fresh wind ; rasches feuer, brisk fire. Bav. rosch, resch. Swab. raisch, fresh, lively, quick ; ON. röskr, acer, strenuus, validus. A rasch carle, a man vigorous beyond his years.—Jam. Pl.D. rask, risk, quick, brisk ; Sw. en ung rasker kerl, a brisk young fellow ; Pol. rzeski, brisk, smart, lively.

The word is formed on the same principle as the adj. rank above explained, from a representation of the sound accompanying any violent action, for which purpose the Germans in common life make use, according to Adelung, of the exclamations rr! hurr! ritsch! ratsch! Hence many verbal forms approaching each other more or less closely. G. rauschen, to rustle, roar, to rush, or move swiftly with noise and bustle. ON. raska,

RASPBERRY ruska, strepere, turbare, violare. Fridr raskadiz, the peace was broken ; taumar raskiz, the reins are broken. Sp. rasgar, to tear ; rasgo, a dash of the pen, a stroke. AS. rascian, stridere, vibrare ; Sc. rasch, dash, collision.

Enee—and Turnus samyn in fere Hurllis togiddir with thare scheildis strang, That for gret raschis al the heuinnis rang. D. V.

To rash, to do anything with hurry or violence, to tear or throw down, to snatch, to rush.

There Marinell great deeds of arms did shew—Rushing off helms and riving plates asunder. F. Q.

I missed my purpose in his arm, rasht his doublet sleeve, ran him close by the left cheek.—B. Jonson in R.

To rash through a darg, to hurry through a day's work.—Jam. I rasshe a thing from one, I take it from hym hastily, Je arache.—Palsgr. See Race.

A rash is an eruption or breaking out of the skin, i. e. the breaking out of an humour, according to the old doctrine.

Rasher. A rasher of bacon is a slice of broiled bacon.

The syllable rash represents the sound of broiling or frizzling. Bav. röschpfann, a frying-pan ; gerösch, a fritter ; reschen, to fry.—Schm. E. dial. rash, to burn in cooking.

The term rash is provincially applied to things that rustle in moving, as corn in the straw which is so dry that it easily falls out in handling.—Hal. Bav. rösch, resch, crackling, crisp, like fresh pastry, dry hay, straw, frozen snow.

To Rasp. The harsh sound of scraping is represented by various similar syllables, rasp, rask, rast ; Sp. raspar, rascar, to rake, scrape ; It. rascare, raschiare, rastiare, to scrape, to hawk or spit up phlegm with a harsh noise. The same two meanings are united in E. rasp and G. räuspern, to hawk. Bav. raspen, to scrape upon a fiddle, to scrape together ; raspeln, to rattle, to scrape together.—Schm.

From the root rast, Lat. rastrum, a harrow, rastellum ; Bret. rastel, Fr. râteau, a rake ; ratelier, a hay-rack.

Raspberry. Formerly raspise or raspise-berry. It. raspo, a bunch or cluster of any berries, namely, of grapes, also the berry that we call raspise.—Fl. Doubtless from rasp, signifying in the first instance scrape, then pluck or gather. It. raspolare, to glean grapes after the vintage. Bav. abreispen, to pluck off, especially the burnt pieces of a torch, to make it burn brighter.
Rat. G. ratze, It. ratto, Fr. rat, Gael. radan.
Ratchet-wheel. A cog-wheel having teeth like those of a saw, against which a spring works, allowing the wheel to move in one direction and not in the other. It appears to be named from the resemblance to a watchman's rattle, where the noise is made by a cogged wheel continually raising and letting fall again a wooden spring. Lim. roqueto, a wooden rattle (moulinet de bois) used instead of bells on Holy Thursday and Good Friday. Doubtless so named from the racket which it makes. It. rocchetto, the cog-wheel of a mill; the wheel about which the string of a clock or of a jack goes.—Fl.
Rate.—To Ratify. Lat. reor, ratus sum, to think, to deem ; ratus, reckoned, allowed, settled, established; rata pars, a proportionate part; pro rata, in proportion. Hence E. rate, a calculated proportion, an assessment in certain proportion. Lat. ratifico, to make firm, to ratify.
To Rate. To assess, to appoint one his due portion of something to be done or paid. Hence to impute or lay something to one's charge, to reprove or chide.
And God was in Crist reconcilinge to him the world, not rettynge [reputans] to hem her giltis.—Wiclif in R.
By the same figure we speak of taxing a man with an offence, or taking him to task on account of it. Tax and task are synonymous with rate. ' I sette one to his taske, what he shall do or what he shall pay ; Je taxe.'—Palsgr. In like manner from It. tansa, a taxing ; tansare, rateably to sess a man for any payment ; also to tax a man with some imputation, to chide, rebuke, or check with words.—Fl.
Rathe.—Rather. Rathe, soon, early ; rather, sooner. I had rather die, I would sooner die. When used to signify a slight degree of a quality it must be understood as asserting that the subject approaches nearer the quality in question than the opposite. Rather deaf, sooner deaf than not, further advanced in the direction of deafness than the opposite. ON. hradr, quick ; hrada, to hasten ; N. rad, quick, hasty, ready, straight ; radt (adv.), quick, readily, straight forwards. Du. rad, Picard rade, nimble, quick.
Ratio.—Rational. From Lat. reor, ratus sum, to think, is ratio, account, reckoning, respect, consideration, proportion, reason ; ratiocinari, to reason.
Rattle. G. rasseln, Pl.D. rastern, Du. ratelen, to make a collection of sounds such as might individually be represented by the syllable ras or rat; Pl.D. rattern, to speak quick and indistinct, to rattle on.—Danneil. Gr. κρότος, the sound of striking; κροτέω, to knock, clap, clatter, rattle, chatter, prate ; κρόταλον, a rattle.
Rattle-traps are old worn-out rattling things, hence a slighting name for moveable goods. So from Norm. pataclas, crash, clatter (Decorde), Lim. potoclan (properly rattle), trumpery, goods. N'o empourta tou soun potoclan, he has taken away all his rattle-traps. Pl.D. rabakken, to rattle ; een oold rabak, an old worn-out piece of goods.
Ravage.—Ravenous.—Ravine.—Ravish. Lat. rapere gives rise to Prov. rapar, arapar, arabar, Fr. ravir, to snatch, to seize ; ravage, spoil, havoc ; ravine, Prov. rabina, violence, impetuosity ; ravineux, impetuous, violent. ' Et li jaians par tel ravine le fiert,' the giant strikes him with such violence.—Rom. de la Violette. In E. ravenous the sense is confined to greediness or eagerness in eating.
Puis menjue de grant ravine Des plus belles qu'il eslut : eats with great violence.—Fab. et Contes, i. 97.
In a different application, ravine d'eau is a great flood, a ravine or inundation of water which overwhelmeth all things that come in its way.—Cot. Thence in a secondary sense, E. ravine is the watercourse of such a flood, a narrow steep hollow cut by floods out of the side of a hill.
To Rave. The syllable rab is used as well as ram (as explained under ramble), in the construction of words representing a confused noise. Piedm. rabadan, ramadan, crash, uproar, bustle, disturbance. Fr. rabalter, rabaster, rabascher, to rumble, rattle, or make a terrible noise, as they say spirits do in some houses.—Cot.
O esprit donc, bon feroit, ce me semble, Avecques toy rabater toute nuict.—Marot.
Prov. rabasta, chiding, quarrel, dispute. Champ, rabache, tapage ; rabacher, radoter, to dote, to rave, and with the b passing into a v, ravacher, ravasser, ravauder, radoter ; ravater, gronder, maltraiter ; raver, vagabonder.—Tarbes. Fr. ravacher, ravasser, to rave, talk idly,— en dormant, to sleep unquietly ; ravaudeur, one that either confounds or understands not what he says, or one that neither says nor does aught rightly, a bungler, botcher ; revayde, a coil or stir ; resver, to rave, dote, speak idly.—Cot. Resver de nuit, courir les rues pendant la nuit ; raver par la ville, courir par la ville.—Roquefort. Hence Du. rabaud, a vagabond, properly a noisy reveller, and with the exchange of b for v, ravot, revot, caterva sive turba nebulonum ; ravotten, tumultuari, et luxuriari, popinari, to riot, revel—Kil., to romp, play in a wild manner.—Bomhoff. The same radical syllable gives also Du. rabbelen, to rattle, gabble ; Pl.D. räbeln, to rave, to be delirious.—Danneil. It. rabillare, to rabble, to huddle, to prattle, or scold.—Fl. Wal. ravle, to dream unquietly ; Du. ravelen, raveelen, æstuare, circumcursare, et delirare, desipere, insanire, furere.—Kil. Revelen, to rave, to dote.—Halma. Champ, revel, bruit, gaité, emeute. To the same root belong Lat. rabies, It. rabbia, rage, madness ; Gael, rabhd, idle talk, coarse tiresome language ; Fr. rabacher, to keep repeating in a tiresome way. See Revel, Riot, Ribald, Rove.

To Ravel. Of thread, to become confused and entangled. It. ravagliare, Fr. raveler, Du. ravelen, rafelen, uitrafelen, to ravel out ; rafeling, unravelled linen, lint. I fasyll out as sylke or velvet, Je rauele.—Palsgr. The primary image is confused and rapid speech, from whence the expression is applied to a confused and entangled texture. Du. rabbelen, to rattle, gabble, precipitare sive confundere verba.—Kil. Rabbelschrift, scrawl, confused writing. Pl.D. rabbi, bustle, disorder, confusion of head. Du. ravelen, revelen, to wander in mind, talk confusedly, rave, dote.

The same passage from the figure of confused speech is seen in Gael, mabair, a stammerer ; mabach, stammering, entangled, confused, ravelled ; and in Du. hatteren, hutteren, to stammer, falter ; Sc. hatter, to speak thick and confusedly ; Pl.D. verhadderen, to entangle, ravel.

Ravelin. Fr. ravelin. It. ravellino, rivellino, a ravelin, a wicket or postern gate ; used also for the utmost bounds of the walls of a castle ; also a sconce without the walls.—Fl.

Raven. ON. hrafn. From Du. raven, to croak. Pl.D. nagt-rave, the night-jar or goat-sucker, from the croaking noise it makes at night. Fin. råddwyn, the croaking of crows or rooks. Lat. ravus, hoarse.

Ravine.—Ravish. See Ravage.

Raw. AS. hreaw, hreoh, Du. rouw, rud, rudis, austerus, asper, insuavis gustu, visu, tactu. Rouw, rauw, rudis, imperfectus, non laboratus, immaturus, crudus. Rouwen, rouden, pectine pannos rudes confricare. ON. hrár, raw, not dried, cooked, salted. Sw. rå wed, green wood ; rådt weder, AS. hreoh weder (Matt. xvi. 3), wet weather. Sw. rå, rude, unworked, unpolished ; G. rauh, rough, raw ; It. ruvido, rough, rugged, rude ; Lat. rudis, rough, unwrought, undressed, raw ; crudus, raw, rough, unpolished, unripe. Bret, criz, w. crai, cri, unprepared, raw ; Fin. raaca, ra'an, unripe, uncooked, untilled, rude ; G. roh, raw, undressed, uncooked, unpolished, rough.

Ray. Lat. radius, a straight rod, spoke of a wheel, and thence a ray or beam of light, which issues from the sun like the spokes from the nave of a wheel. Fr. ray (m.), a ray or beam of the sun, spoke of a wheel ; raie (f.), a ray, line, streak, row, spoke of a wheel. Prov. rai, raig, rait, rach, rah, ray, line, current ; rega, streak, furrow ; raia, ray. It. radio, raggio, razzo, a ray ; Sp. rayo, a ray, beam of light, straight line, radius of circle, spoke of a wheel ; raya, stroke, dash of a pen, streak, line ; rayado, streaky. Rayar, to streak, to rifle, to draw lines, to expunge or strike out ; raza, ray, beam of light. Piedm. riga, a line, stroke, strip of wood ; rigâ, striped. We see a masc. and fem. form running through the Romance languages, of which the m. is doubtless from Lat. radius, but the f. has probably come from a Gothic influence. G. reihe, Pl.D. riege, E. row, line, order, rank.

To Raze. To lay even with the ground.—B. Fr. ras, shaven, cut close by the ground, cut close away. Couper tout ras, to cut clean off, sweep clean away.—Cot. Lat. radere, rasum, to shave. Fr. rez, level, ground, floor, bottom ; rez de chaussée, level with the pavement, ground floor. Mettre rez pied rez terre, to raze, make even with the ground.—Cot.

To rase, in the sense of scratching out a word in writing, is singularly confounded with race, to obliterate by a stroke of the pen. I race, I stryke out a word or a lyne with a pen, Je arrache. I race a writynge, I take out a word with a pomice or penknife. Je efface des mots. I rase, je defface ; I rase or stryke out with the pen, j'arrache.—Palsgr. In the same way erase, to scrape out, is confounded with arace, to strike out. I arace, I scrape out a word or a blot, je efface.—Palsgr.

Probably this is one of the numerous cases in which ultimate unity of origin shows itself in close resemblance between remote descendants, and Lat. radere, rasum, to scratch or scrape, belongs to the same class with G. reissen, to tear; OE. rash, to dash, to tear; Fr. arracher, E. arace, race.

Re-. Red-. Lat. re, again, back.

To Reach. G. reichen, to extend to; recken, to draw out, to stretch; Du. reiken, to reach; Pl.D. raken, reken, to reach, to touch; It. recare, to reach unto, bring unto. Gr. ὀρέγειν, Lat. porrigere, to reach forward; dirigere, to direct, &c.

A reach of a river is so far as it stretches in one direction.

* To Read. AS. radan, to advise, counsel, direct, appoint, govern, to interpret, to read. Swa swa Josue him rædde, as Joshua directed him. Swefn rædan, as Sc. to red, to interpret a dream. 'The gude king gaif the gest to God for to rede:' gave up his spirit to God to dispose of.—Jam. ON. ráða, to direct or dispose of, to take counsel, to interpret, to read. Ef ek má ráða, if I may decide. At ráða draum, runar, stafi, rit, skrá, to explain a dream, to read runes, letters, writing. Uppráða bref, to read aloud a letter. Sw. råda, to counsel, to direct, to have one's way. Rá sig sjelf, to be one's own master. Da. raade, to advise, sway, rule, to divine, unriddle; raade bod paa, to devise a remedy for. Goth. garedan, to provide; fauragaredan, to foreappoint. ON. ræða, G. reden, Sc. rede, to speak, to discourse, seem derivative forms.

It is difficult to speak with any confidence as to the fundamental meaning of the word. Perhaps the most plausible suggestion is that it signifies to lay in order, to dispose, arrange. To consult is to lay in order one's thoughts; to read a dream or a riddle, to lay in order the several parts and so to make clear their meaning. ON. röð, Sw. rad, a line, rank, row; ON. raða, to dispose, arrange (Haldorsen); Pol. rząd, order, rule; rządzić, to direct, govern, manage; Boh. rad, Illyr. red, rank, order; Boh. raditi, Illyr. rediti, to dispose, arrange; Lith. rėdyti, to set in order, to dress; rėdas, arrangement, order.

Ready. AS. rad, geræd, Pl.D. reed, rede, Du. gereed, G. bereit, ready; Dan. rede, plain, straight, clear, ready, prepared. Rede söli,—penge, ready money; en rede sag, a clear case. Rede, to prepare, to deal with. At rede en seng, to make a bed; —for sig, to acquit oneself; —sit haar, to comb one's hair; —sig ud av, to extricate oneself. At giöre rede for, to give account of a matter. Redskab, tool, implement, with which anything is done. Sw. reda, to prepare, to set to rights, to dress, to fit out, to arrange; reda, order; redig, clear, regular, orderly. N. reiug (for reidug), ready. ON. reiða, to deal with, drive, set forth, prepare. Reiða sverðit, to wield a sword; —fram mat, to set out food; —féit, —ut af, to pay money. Reiða, apparatus, preparation; til reiðu, in readiness. Reiði, harness, rigging of a ship. Sc. to red, to disentangle, to clear, make way, put in order.

Reaks. To revel it, to play reaks.—Cot. in v. degonder. See Rig.

Real. Lat. realis, of the nature of a thing; what is in deed and not merely in show; res, a thing.

Realm. OFr. realme, reaulme, reaume, Prov. reyalme. It. reame, kingdom. According to Diez through a form regalimen, from regalis.

* Ream. Du. riem, Fr. rame. It. risina, risima, resima, Sp. resma, a bundle of twenty quires of paper. From Arab. rizma, a bale, packet, bundle, especially a ream of paper. Rizma itself is from razama, to pack together. As paper seems to have been first received from the Arabs, it was natural that the terms relating to it should have come from the same quarter. The acts of the Caliph Haroun Alraschid are written on paper of cotton, while the earliest Western documents are of the eleventh century.—Dozy.

To Reap. Sc. rep, reip, NE. reap, AS. rípa, ripe, a handful of corn in the ear; to reap, AS. hriopan, ripan, to gather reaps, to harvest the corn. The remote origin is shown in Goth. raupjan, G. raufen, Du. roopen, ruepen, Pl.D. ruppen, repen, to pluck. Goth. raupjan ahsa, to pluck ears of corn.—Marc 2. 23. In the Salic laws reffare segetem. So from Swab. raspen, to pluck, to gather, G. rispe, rispe, an ear of corn; mhg. respe, a bundle of twigs; It. raspolo, a bunch of grapes.

* Rear. Thin, rawish, as eggs, &c., boiled rear.—B. See Rare.

Rear. Prov. reire, OFr. riere, from

Lat. retro, behind. It. dietro, Prov. de-ire, Fr. derrière, behind.
To Rear. Another form of raise, analogous to Du. verlieren and verliesen, to kieren and kiesen, to choose, &c. ON. ræran, to rear, raise.
Reason. Fr. raison, Lat. ratio.
Reasty. Reasty or reezed bacon is bacon grown rancid by keeping, now generally pronounced rusty from an accommodation of the name to the rusty hue of bacon in that condition. Fr. rance, musty, fusty, resty, reasy, dankish, disavoury.—Cot. I reast, I waxe ill of taste, as bacon.—Palsgr. p. 688. Caro rancidus, rest flesh.—Eng. Vocab. in Nat. Hist. The radical meaning seems to be stale or over-kept bacon, as chars restez (remnants, broken meat) is glossed in Belesworth by resty flees (resty flesh), and resty or restive (from Fr. rester) is pronounced reasty in the N. of E. 'A reasty horse.'—Brocket.
Il avera payn musy, ho cerveise assez egre, Bure assez resie, moruhe assez megre: stale or rancid butter.—Reliq. Ant. 155. Of the finely dressed ladies returning from the feast and putting on their homely attire, it is said: Pas s'en vont a l'oustel, retornent de la feste, E tantost si changent la bele lusante teste, Cele ke fu si fresche ja devient si reste, Ke le marchant se repent ke achata cele beste. she who was so fresh now becomes so old.—Satire on Ladies, Rel. Ant. 163.
To Reave.—To Rive. Of these verbs the latter is nearer the original form. ON. rífa, to tear asunder; rifinn, ragged, torn; rífa (pret. rauf, ptcp. rofið), to tear asunder, to break up. Hence AS. reaf, Du. roof, G. raub, spoil, what is torn away, carried off; AS. reafian, Goth. raufan, Pl.D. roven, Dan. rove, to rob; ON. rúfari, reyfari, Sc. reiver, a robber.
The sense of robbing or violently taking away is commonly taken from the figure of scraping or scratching. Sw. rifwa, to scratch, tear, claw, grate, rasp. Rifwa et hus, to tear down a house. Dan. rive, to rasp, to rive, rend, tear. Du. riffelen, to rub, rake, scrape. Bret. skrapa, to seize with the claws, gripe, carry away, &c.; skraba, to scratch, to scrape, to rob. In the same way the original sense of Lat. rapere, to seize, to rob, has probably been that of Pl.D. raopen (Danneil), G. raffen, to scrape or rake.
Rebeck. Bret. rebet, rebed, Fr. rebec, rebebe, reberbe.—Roquef. It. ribeca, ribebba, a crowd, or fiddler's kit.—OE. ribible. Corrupted from Arab. rubabah. 'Besides this they have the one-stringed rubabah or guitar.'—Thomson, Pilgrimage to Medina.
Rebel. Lat. rebellis, warring against, from bellum, war.
Rebuff. An expression formed on the same principle as the vulgar blow up, to scold. 'He gave him a good blowing up.' It. buffa, a puff, blurt with the mouth made at one in scorn, also a brabble or brawling contention; rabbuffare, ribuffare, to check, rebuke, chide.—Fl. OFr. rebouffer, to repulse, drive away with contempt.—Roquef.
Rebuke. It is difficult to make up our mind as to the Fr. form from which the word is taken. The closest resemblance is to Rouchi rebuquer, to give one blows. Té s'ras ben rebuqué, you will catch it. But the sense agrees better with Fr. rebecquer, to peck again as one cock at another, to answer saucily.—Cot. Bret. rébecha (Fr. ch), to rebuke, reprove; It. ribeccamento di parole, a check or rebuke with taunting words; rimbeccare, to retort back word for word or blow for blow, to beat back by direct opposition; rimboccare, to retort word for word, to upbraid, to twit or hit one in the teeth of anything done for him.—Fl. As It. bocca corresponds to Norm. bouque, mouth, rimboccare should be replaced by Norm. rebouquer, which however is only given in the sense of Fr. reboucher, to nauseate (ne pouvoir plus manger—Decorde); reboucher le cœur, to turn the stomach. Genevese rebequer, dégoûter, soulever le cœur.
Rebus. A riddle where the meaning is indicated by things (Lat. rebus) represented in pictures, the syllables forming the names of the things represented having to be grouped in a different manner. Thus the picture of a fool on his knees with a horn at his mouth is to be read in Fr. fol à genoux trompe (tromper, to blow a horn), but read in a different manner it gives fol age nous trompe.—Cot. Rebuses in Heraldry are such coats as represent the name by things, as three castles for Castleton.
To Rebut. Fr. rebuter, rebouter, to put or thrust back, to reject, refuse; bouter, to thrust, put, push forwards. It. buttare, to throw, cast, fling; ributtare, to cast back, repulse, reject.
To Recant. It. ricantare, to sing again. Fr. deschanter, to recant, unsay.
Receipt.—Recipe. Receipt, a medicine prepared for the cure of diseases.—B. Receyte of dyvers thynges in a medicine: recepte.—Palsgr. Originally applied to medicine, the term is extended to signify instructions for compounding any other kind of thing, as a receipt for making soap, for tanning leather, &c. The word is sometimes spelt recipe, from that word being placed at the head of a physician's instructions for the medicine to be taken by his patient.

Recent. Lat. recens, fresh, new.
Reciprocal. Lat. reciprocus, working to and fro.
To Reck.—Reckless. AS. recan, reccan, pr. rohte, Pl.D. rocken, Du. roecken, rochten, OHG. rohjan, ruachen, OSax. rokean, ruokean, to reck, regard, care, care for ; Pl.D. rokeloos, Du. reukelos, G. ruchlos, reckless. ON. rækja, to care, to take care of ; afrœkjaz, to neglect ; rœskja veiðifang, to attend to fishing ; rœkjandi, qui curam gerit, curator. Hvat rœskir thik ? cujus rei rationem habes ? quid curæ tibi est ? OHG. ruahha, roka, care. Lith. rupėti, to concern. Kas iai taw rupi, what does that concern you ? Rupus, careful ; rupinti, to take care of ; nerupus, reckless, careless.
With regard to the origin we can only suggest with great reserve Du. raaken, to touch, to hit, thence to concern, to regard. Dingen die my raaken, things which concern me. Hy wierd door haar elende geraakt, he was touched by her misery. Wat raakt u dat? what does that concern you, what is that to you ? Compare Sc. Quhat raik ? what does it signify, what do I care ?
Flattry. I will ga counterfeite the freir,
Dissait. A freir ! quhair to ? thow cannot preiche—
Flattry. Quhat raik ? bot I can flatter and fleiche.—Lyndsay in Jam.
On the other hand, Lith. rokundas, reckoning, is also used in the sense of affair, concern. Tai mano rokundas, that is my business. ON. rök, events, things ; OHG. racha, rahha, thing, cause ; Pol. rzecz, speech, subject, fact, affair, thing. See Reckon.
To Reckon. AS. recan, reccean, to say, recite, tell, number, reckon. Ic mæg reccan, I can relate. Bigspell reccan, to tell a parable. Areccan of Ladene on Englisc, to translate from Latin into English. Gereccean þankas, to give thanks. Racce, narration, account, speech. OHG. rahha, res, ratio, causa, fabula ; rahhon, rachon, rechen, gerechen, to say, tell, interpret ; Goth. rahnjan, to count, account, reckon ; faura-rahnjan, to prefer ; Pl.D. reken, rekenen, G. rechnen, to reckon.
Lith. rokóti, to say, tell, reckon ; rokótis, to reckon with oneself, consider ; rokundas, reckoning, concern ; rokubà, reckoning, number, account. Pol. rachować, to count, reckon ; rachunek, account, reckoning, bill ; rachunki (pl.), arithmetic ; rachuba, calculation. Rzeć, rzeknąć, to say ; rzecz, speech, subject, matter, affair, thing. Esthon. rääkima, rääkma, to speak ; rääklema, to reckon. Fin. räkista, to speak, speak loudly, loquens strepo ; räkinä, sermocinatio.
Recluse. Fr. reclus, Lat. recludo, reclusum. The classical sense of the Lat. word is to set open ; the E. & Fr. words take a sense nearly opposite.
To Recoil. Formerly written recule or recuil; Fr. reculer, to draw back, from cul, the rump.
Recondite. Lat. recondo, reconditum, to hide or lay up apart.
Reconnoitre. Fr. reconnaître, to examine carefully, Lat. recognoscere, to take notice of again.
Record. Lat. recordari, to call to mind ; from cor, cordis, the heart.
To Recoup. To diminish by keeping back a part as a claim for damages.—Worcester. Fr. recouper, to cut again in order to correct the fault of a first cutting.—Trevoux.
To Recover. Fr. recouvrer. It. ricoverare, Lat. recuperare, to recover or get again. This verb, which has no derivation in Lat., would seem to find its explanation in Swab. kober, E. coffer, a basket, whence Swab. kobern, erkobern, to get, to earn ; Bav. erkobern, erkowvern sich (sich erholen), to recover health or strength. Irkoboran, adipisci.—Otfr.
But what glut of the gomes May any good kachen, He will kepen it himself, And coffrene it faste.—P. P. Creed, 133.
Recreant. Mid.Lat. recredere. It. ricredere, OFr. recroire, are not to be explained as originally signifying to change one's belief, but to give up, give back the subject of dispute, to give in, to yield, to fail. ' Cum Blancha comitissa Campaniæ cepisset et captum teneret dilectum et fidelem meum H., ipsa per preces et requisitionem meam illum mihi recredidit [delivered him up to me] tali pacto quod ego cepi super me et eidem dominæ meæ concessi, sicut homo suus ligius, quod infra quindenam quam ab ipsâ inde fuero requisitus prædictum H illi reddam in sua captione apud Pruvinum.'—Document A.D. 1211 in Carp. ' L'evesque de Chartres me requist fist le roy que je li feisse recroire ce que je tenois du sien.'—Joinville, ibid. But it was often used for virtually giving up or acknowledging the right to be in another, and giving pledges for actual delivery when required. Reddere vel recredere is to give actual possession, or to give security for delivery in due season. ' Cognoscentesque rei veritatem atque comprobationem statim se recrediderunt,' they gave in. ' Tassilo venit per semetipsum tradensque se in manus domini regis Caroli in vassaticum, et recredidit se in omnibus se peccasse [he gave himself up as having been altogether in the wrong] et mala egisse, denuo renovans sacramenta.'—Annales Francorum A.D. 787 in Duc.
' Quando i vescovi del tempio viddero che 'l re si ricredea d'andare a adorare i loro Iddei si ebbero grande paura:' when the priests saw that the king gave up worshipping their gods. ' I Fiorentini ordinarono di fare armata in mare per fare ricredenti i Pisani della loro arroganza : ' to make the Pisans abate their arrogance.—La Crusca.
Ne direz ja que failliz seie, Ne que de valeir me recreie. Chron. des ducx de Norm. i. 418.
You shall not say that I am failed, nor that I have given up my valour.
The active and passive participles, It. ricredente, ricreduto, Fr. recréant, recreu, were used in general of one who yields in battle, and especially of the beaten party in a judicial combat.
Vedrai, in uno stante o vivo o morto Ricredente il faro ; datti conforto : in one instant alive or dead I will make him give in. ' E se tu mi vinci, rimarrò vostro ricredente siccome il cavalier che combatte il torto : ' and if you conquer me I will remain at your mercy like the champion who fights for the wrong. The formula to be pronounced by the champion undertaking a duel is given in the Assises de Jerusalem. ' Je suis prest de le prouver de mon corps contre le sien, et le rendrai mort ou recréant en une heure du jour, et vééz cy mon gage.'—Duc. Thus recreant became a term of abuse of the utmost infamy, equivalent to poltroon, coward, convicted traitor. Coward, recreant.—Palsgr.
Recruit. From Fr. recroist, a re-increase, a new or second growth ; recroistre, to grow or spring up again.—Cot.
To recruit, to supply or fill up, to re-inforce.—B.
Rect-. -rect.—Rector. Lat. rego, rectum, to direct, rule, govern ; in comp.

-rigo, to drive, cause motion in, guide. Rectus, right, straight, driven to a certain point. Dirigo, to guide between, aim at one among several points, to order, arrange ; erigo, to rear up, raise from out of; porrigo, to stretch forward ; corrigo, to straighten, to bring to agree with a pattern, &c. See Reach, Regal.
Recumbent. Lat. recumbo; cumbo; cubo, to lie down. Gr. κύπτω, to stoop.
Red. Goth. rauds, ON. raudr, W. rhwdd, Lat. rutilus, Gr. ἐρυθρός.
Redan.—Redent. In fortification, an indented work with salient and re-entering angles.—B.
Redeem.—Redemption. Lat. redimo, redemptum; re, again or back, emo, to buy.
Redolent. Lat. redoleo, to give out a smell ; oleo, to smell.
Redoubt. Fr. reduite. It. ridotto, Sp. reducto, reduto, a blockhouse, or little fort, within which soldiers may retire on occasion. It. riducere, ridurre, Fr. reduire, reduit, to bring back ; reduit, a place of retiral.
Redound.—Redundant. Lat. redundare, to overflow, rise above the banks ; re and unda, a wave.
Reed. Du. riet, OHG. hriot, AS. hreod. Probably named from their rustling or whispering sound. Du. rijsselen, rijtelen, susurare, levi strepitu moveri.—Biglotton. Fin. rytista, to rustle, to sound lightly as a reed breaking ; ryti, reed, sedge. So from kahata, to rustle as a mouse among straw, to whisper as the wind among reeds ; kahila, reed. So also ON. reyra, stridere, fremere (Egils.) ; AS. hreran, to agitate; ON. reyr, reyrr, a reed.
Reef.—Riff. I. A ridge of rocks projecting above the water. G. raufe (from raufen, to pluck), provincially raff, reff (Westerwald), raufel, reffel, riffel (Kütn.), a kind of fixed comb through which the flax or hemp is drawn, to pluck off the heads of seeds ; ON. hrifa, a rake. Du. rieve, rieffe, a rake or comb.—Kil. From the figure of a comb the term ráf, reff, is in Swabia applied to a row of long projecting teeth. Westerwald zahnrahf, a gap in the teeth ; raffel, ráffel, zahn-ráffel, a broken-toothed person. The comparison to a row of broken teeth is equally applicable to a ridge of rocks.
The whole fleet was lost on a riff or ridge of rocks that runs off from the isle of Aves.—Dampier in R.
Bav. riffen, riffeln, to ripple flax ; riffel, a jagged ridge of rocks. OHG. riffila, serra.—Gl. in Schm. Compare Sp. sierra.

a saw, a ridge of mountains and craggy rocks, standing out like the teeth of a saw against the sky.
In Du. rif, riffe, the term is improperly extended to a projecting sand-bank or spit of sand. Sw. ref, reef of rocks, sand-bank.

2. A reef, Du. reef, rif, is a row of short ropes stretching across a sail for the purpose of tying the strip of sail above the reef up to the yard, and so diminishing the size of the sail. When loose they hang against the sail like the teeth of a comb, from whence apparently the name. Rif or rift inbinden, to take in a reef.—Kil.

To Reek. To smoke, to steam. AS. ríc, ON. reykr, G. rauch, Du. rook, smoke.

To Reel. To move unsteadily like a drunken man, to turn round ; Sc. reile, to roll the eyes. The formation of the word may be explained by Swiss riegeln, to rattle, then to wriggle, swarm ; Bav. rigeln, to set in motion, to shake, stir; rogel, roglet, loose, shaky ; N. rigga, rugga, to shake, rock; rigla, rugla, to be loose, to waver, totter ; Sw. ragla, to reel, stagger, move in zigzags. In like correspondence to E. wriggle we have Sc. wreil, to turn about.

Quha is attaichit unto ane stalk we see May go no forther, but wreil about that tre.
D.V. 8.27.

The Scotch reel is a dance in which three or four dancers in a row twist in and out round each other. It is known in Norway and Denmark under the same name of ril or riel, Gael. righil.

To reel silk or thread is to wind it round an appropriate implement, so as to make a skein of it. Gael. ruidhil, ruidhle, ruidhlichean, a reel, probably from the E.

The designation of a broken or confused motion is commonly taken from the representation of a sound of like character, and it may be that reel is not so much a contraction of forms like the foregoing as a parallel form, originally, like them, a direct representation of sound. Sc. reiling, a loud clattering noise, confusion, bustle ; reil, a confused motion.—Jam. Supp. Pl.D. rallen, to make a noise as children at play ; Dan. dial. raale, role, to cry ; Dan. vraale, to bawl, squawl.

Reeve. The bailiff of a franchise or manor.—B. AS. gerefa, ON. greifi, a prefect, governor ; Du. graef, greeve, G. graf, count. In composition, shire-reeve, or sheriff, port-reeve, borough-reeve.

To Refrain. Lat. frænum, a bridle ; refræno, to curb in, to hold back.

Refulgence. Lat. fulgeo, fulsi, to shine.

* Refuse. It. rifiutare, rifusare, Sp. refusar, rehusar, Fr. refuser. The word is explained by Diez as arising from a mixture of Lat. recusare and refutare, but it can hardly be necessary to resort to so doubtful a plan of origination. We have Prov. refutz, refut, refui (Fr. refus), refusal, contempt, disdain ; refudar, refuydar, refusar, Piedm. rifudé, to refuse ; Castrais rafut, rafus, refusal ; rafuda, rafusa, to refuse. ' Refused his wife,' divorced her.—Capgrave Chron. 245. See -fute.

Regal.—Regent.—Reign.—Royal. Lat. rego, to govern, gives rex, regis, and thence It. re, OFr. rei, Fr. roi, a king ; regnum, Fr. regne, a kingdom, reign ; regner, to reign. Sanscr. rág, to govern ; rágan, a king ; rájní (Lat. regina), a queen ; rájatá, royalty. The radical sense of the word, to guide or direct, appears in the Lat. compounds. See Rect-.

To Regale. Sp. regalar, to make good cheer, to make much of, to gratify, caress, entertain ; regalarse, to fare sumptuously, to take pleasure in, also to melt. Plumbum regalatum is explained by Papias liquefactum. It is not easy to understand why Diez should separate the word from It. gala, good cheer ; Fr. galer, to entertain with sport, game, or glee—Cot., galer, se rejouir.—Roquef. It has already been shown that the latter forms spring from the image of floating or swimming in delight. It. galare, to float, might be used to explain Sp. regalar, as signifying to cause to float or swim, then to melt. The connection between the ideas of melting and of enjoyment may be illustrated by a quotation from Spenser given under Gala.

Long thus he lived slumbring in sweet delight, Bathing in liquid joys his melted sprite.

Regard. It. riguardare, Fr. regarder. It. guardare, to look. See Guard.

Regatta. It. regata, regatta, a boat race much used at Venice.—Vanzoni. Sunt et alia spectacula à pluribus sæculis usitata Florentiae, Senae, Venetiis, videlicet, il gioco del calcio, le regatte, &c.—Murat. Diss. 29, 853. It. rigatta, any striving or struggling for the mastery, a play among children called musse (hide and seek) ; rigattare, to contend for the victory, to wrangle or shift for, to cog and lie craftily.—Fl. Brescian regata, strife, scramble ; fare a regata, fare a ruffa raffa, to scramble for anything.—Melchiori. Venet. regetare, fare a gara.—Patriarchi. Sp. regate, a quick turn to avoid a blow ; regatear, to wriggle, to shuffle, to haggle. Sw. dial. ragata, to be noisy, to make a disturbance.

Regimen.—Regiment. Lat. regimen, regimentum, government. Medical regimen is the government of one's diet, &c., under medical directions. A regiment, a body of men under one command. See Regal.

Region. Lat. regio, -nis, a tract of country. From rego.

Register. Lat. regero (gero, to carry), to cast back, cast up again ; regestum, earth cast up out of a trench ; whence fig. regesta, and corruptly registra, notes of things thrown together in a memorandum book, a register.

Regesta, -orum, res multæ in unum collectæ, et in tabulas et commentarios relatæ, quas vulgo registra dicunt.—Vopiscus in Forcell. I regyster, I put a thyng in writynge in a booke of recorde.—Palsgr.

Regrator. A huckster, or one who trimmeth up old wares for sale ; but it is commonly taken for him who buys and sells any wares or victuals at the same market, or within five miles thereof.—B. Fr. regrat, sale of salt by retail ; marchandises de regrat, trumpery goods bought to sell again ; regratter, to haggle, to sell salt in small quantities. C'est un homme qui regratte sur tout, who haggles at the most trifling article ; regrattier, a huckster, broker. Regratier de sel, de vivres, &c.

Commonly explained from Fr. gratter, to scratch, through its supposed compound regrater, to dress, mend, scour, furbish, trim or trick up an old thing for sale.—Cot. The difficulty is that it is hardly possible to separate Fr. regratier from It. rigatiere, a huckster, retailer, regrater, or such a one as at a cheap rate engrosseth commodities and then sells them very dear.—Fl. Rigatiere also, like Fr. regratier, signifies a broker or furbisher up of old things for sale. Sp. regatero, regatón, a huckster, a retailer. The two forms, with and without the r, are found side by side in Limousin regrotaire, recotaire, a corn badger, or one who buys corn at a cheap market to sell it at one worse supplied.—Beronie. Fr. Flanders haricotier (Vermesse, Hécart), a huckster, broker, seems to be another form of the same word, corresponding to Bayonne haricoter, to haggle, as Sp. regatero to regatear, recatear, Ptg. regatar, to haggle, to huckster. Wall. halcoter, to joggle, to haggle.—Grandg. Sp. regatear is also to riggle or move sideways, to shuffle in business. See Regatta.

Regret. Properly to lament, then to grieve for. I mone as a chylde doth for the wanting of his nourse, je regrete.—Palsgr. Regreter was also to scold.

Que Madame m'a fait regret Que j'ai affaitié mon chiennet. Fab. et Contes, 4. 319.

Grate, reprimande.—Pat. de Champ. ON. grátr, weeping, lamentation ; Sc. greet, to cry.

Regular.—Regulate. Lat. regula, a rule or ruler, a pattern for guidance in drawing lines. From rego, to direct or govern.

To Rehearse. Fr. rehercer, to repeat what one has already said.—Roquef. Properly to go over again like a harrow (Fr. herce) over a ploughed field.

Et si le rois o lui conseille Molt ait bien overte l'oreille, Que ne lui covient hercier, Ce que le rois li velt chargier. Fab. et Contes, 2. 161.

—it is not fitting to go over the ground again, to make the king repeat his charge.

The same met. is seen in ON. hrífa, a rake, also iteration. Hann kalladi upp í hrífu, clamitabat. To rake, to repeat a tale.—Hal. Gael. ràc, rake, rehearse, repeat.—Armstrong.

Reign. See Regal.

Rein. Fr. resne, reine, the reigne of a bridle.—Cot. OFr. regne, Prov. regns, regna. It. redina, Ptg. redea, rein, bridle. According to Diez from retinere, to hold in.

Bret. ren, direction, government ; réna, to direct, govern, guide ; ranjen, renjen, rein.

Reins.—Renal. Lat. ren, renis, the kidneys.

Relative. Lat. relativus, from refero, relatum, to bring back, refer.

Relay. A relay of dogs or horses is a supply of fresh animals posted to relieve and take the place of a tired set. The explanation of the word is not to be found in the notion of laying on the fresh animals, but in the release or dismissal of the old. It. rilasciare, to release, to acquit or discharge ; rilascio, rilasso, a release or discharging. Cani di rilasso, fresh hounds laid for a supply set upon a deer already hunted by other dogs.—Fl. Fr. chevaux de relais, horses layed in certain places on the highway for the ease of those one hath already rid hard on.

relais, spared, at rest, that is not used.
Relayer, to succeed in the place of the weary, to relieve or ease another by the undertaking of his task.—Cot. Relays, chose delaissée, abandonnée.—Roquef.
Release. To release is to let loose, to let go the hold one has on anything. Lat. relaxare, to slacken ; It. rilasciare, to relax, release, relinquish ; Fr. relaisser, to relinquish, forego again. See Lease.
Relent. Fr. ralentir. It. rallentare, Lat. relentcsco, to grow soft and limber ; lentus, supple, pliable.
Relevant. Tending to support the cause, important to the matter in question. Lat. relevo, to lift up again.
Relic.—Relict.—Relinquish. Lat. linquo, to leave ; relinquo, relictum, to leave behind ; reliquiæ, Fr. relique, relick, remains. Lith. lykus, overplus, remainder ; likti, to remain over. See Eleven.
Relief.—To Relieve. Lat. relevare, to lighten, to raise or lift up, to relieve from a burden, render more tolerable, refresh. It. rilevare, rilievare, to raise, lift up again, to work raised or embossed work ; to comfort, to cure or recover again ; rilevo, relievo, any uprising or uptaking, any raising or advancing, any ease or relief, also any raised or embossed work ; also leavings, remainders or scraps of anything (what is taken up after a meal).—Fl. It. rilievo, Fr. relief, E. relief, was also the duty paid by the heir to his lord on taking up the inheritance of a deceased ancestor.
Religion. Lat. religio.
Relinquish. See Relic.
Relish. Savour, enjoyment of food. CentralFr. relicher, to lick; se relicher, to show enjoyment by licking one's chaps again. Il a trouvé ce plat si bon qu'il s'en reliche.—Jaubert. The Academy uses the expression s'en lécher les babines.
Reluctant. Lat. lucta, a wrestling ; reluctor, to struggle against.
To Rely. To rest or repose upon—R., properly to look to for rest or repose ; not from E. to lie, but Fr. relayer, to ease another by an undertaking of his task ; se relayant l'un l'autre, easing one another by turns.—Cot. To rely on one then is to look to him for a relay.
To Remain. Lat. maneo, to wait, stay, stick ; remaneo, to continue, to be left after.
Remedy. See Medicine.
Remember. Lat. rememoror, to call to memory. See Memory.
Reminiscence. Lat. reminiscor, memini, to remember. Gr. μιμνήσκομαι, μνησθῆναι, perf. μέμνημαι, to remember. From the root men (signifying think) of mens, mind.
Remonstrate. Mid.Lat. remonstrare: re and monstrare, to show, point out.
Remorse. Lat. mordeo, morsum, to bite ; remordeo, to bite again, to torment or grieve one. An old English treatise on the Remorse of Conscience is called the Againbite of Inwit.
Remote. Lat. remotus, from removeo, to move back, away.
Remunerate. Lat. munus, -eris, a gift, recompense.
To Rend. ON. rán, rapine ; rana, to seize by violence, plunder. E. dial. ran, force, violence.—Hal. The radical image is the sound accompanying violent action, produced by giving way of opposition before it. Examples of the representation of such a noise by the syllable ran are given under Random. We may add Gael. ràn, roar, shriek, make a noise ; It. ranto, the noise made in the throat by difficult breathing ; rantolare, rantacare, to hawk or keck. The resemblance between the harsh sounds produced in the throat when oppressed by phlegm and the sound of tearing is witnessed by Gael. ràc, a crash, the noise of cloth in the act of tearing, of a scythe in the process of mowing, compared with N. rækja, to hawk ; Picard. raquer, to spit ; and by Bret. strak, noise, crack, crash ; Gael. srac (for strak), tear, rend, rob, spoil ; It. stracciare, to tear, compared with Grisons scracchiar, Sicil. scraccair, to spit.
To Render.—Rent. Lat. reddere (redare). It. rendere, Fr. rendre, to give up, to yield. It. rendita della terra, the fruits of the earth ; what it annually yields ; rendita, rendite (Fr. rente), revenues, incomes, yearly rents, land profits.—Fl.
Renegade. It. rinnegato, Sp. renegado, one who renounces his faith, an apostate, a wicked, perverse person ; renegare (Lat. negare), to deny, disown, then to blaspheme, to curse. See Runagate.
Rennet.—Runnet. The membrane of a calf's stomach for curdling milk. G. gerinnen, Du. rennen, rinnen, runnen (Kil.), to run together, to coagulate, curdle; rensal, rinsal, runsal (Kil.), OE. renlys or rendlys [renels, P.] for mylke, coagulum.—Pr. Pm.
Renown. Fr. renom, renommée, renown, fame. Sp. renombre, surname, epithet added to the name of a person, renown, reputation ; renombrar, to give a name, to render famous. The nasal sound of the final m and n in Fr. being unknown in E. was represented indifferently by m or n. Thus Fr. nom, a name, became E. noun, a substantive, and the word was written in the same way in our Norman Fr. Les nouns de lour nief, barge, balengere, &c. : the names of their ship, &c.—Stat. H. v. c. 6. On the other hand, renown was often written with an m.

Her name was Rosiphele, Which was of grete renome.—Gower. Go to then, O thou far renowmed son Of great Apollo.—F. Q.

Repair. 1. Lat. reparare, Fr. reparer, to get again, to restore, recover, renew. 2. Fr. parer, to ward off, leads to It. riparo, a defence, shelter, place of refuge; Fr. repaire, a lodging, haunt, den of a beast, and thence repairer, to haunt, frequent, lodge in a certain place, giving rise to E. repair, to resort to, to return as to one's den.

Repartee. Fr. repartie, an answering blow in fencing, &c., and thence, a return of or answer in speech, a reply.—Cot. Partir, to set out, start with impetuosity, to go off as a gun ; partir d'éclat de rire, to burst out laughing. Thus repartee is a prompt reply.

Repast. Lat. pascor, to feed ; pastus, food.

To Repeal. Fr. rappeler (Lat. re-appellare, to call back), to revoke or make void.

Repeat.—Repetition. Lat. repeto, repetitum, to ask back, go over again.

Repertory. Lat. repertorium, an inventory, from reperio, repertum, to find, meet with.

To Repine. Properly to feel dissatisfaction, then to express it.

Then the knyght retourned again to them and shewed the kinges wordes, the whiche gretly encouraged them, and repoyned [se repentirent] in that they had said to the king as they did.—Berner's Froissart in R.

From It. repugnere, Fr. repoindre, to prick again.

Now when they heard this they were pricked in their heart (weren compunct in herte.—Wicliff).—Acts ii. 37.

Replenish.—Replete. Lat. repleo, repletum, to fill full. See Plenary.

Replevy. See Pledge.

Reprehend. Lat. reprehendo, to lay hold on, blame, rebuke. See -prehend.

* Reprieve. Reprieve or repreve is OFr. reprover, repreuver, from Lat. reprobare, to disallow, reject, mislike.—Littleton. Christ suffered many reprevynges for us.—Mandeville in Hall. Reprevyn, reprehendo, redargue.—Pr. Pm. The reprieve of a criminal must be an elliptical expression for the disallowing of the sentence.

Reprimand. Fr. reprimande, Sp. reprimenda. Explained from Lat. reprimere, to repress, snub, or keep under (Litt.), analogous to Fr. offrande, an offering, from offrir. On that principle reprimenda should signify a fault, but it does not appear in Latin in that sense.

Reprisal. It. ripresaglia, whence Fr. représaille, E. reprisal, from Lat. reprehendere, reprensus, to take back again.

Reproach. Fr. Sp. reproche, It. rimproccio, Prov. repropche, reproach, blame, outrage. Explained by Diez as equivalent to a Lat. repropiare (analogous to Fr. approcher for appropiare), a prope, near ; to bring a man's actions before him, to twit him with them. But repropiare, to bring near, is far from having the force of G. vorwerfen, to cast before one. And though no doubt a difficult step remains to be supplied, it seems more probable that the origin is to be found in It. brobbio, from opprobrium, reproach, disgrace. Mi disse mille brobbii, he covered me with abuse. Rimbrobbiare, rimbroggiare, or rimproppiare, rimprocciare. The intermediate form rimbroccio is vouched by Florio. The change from bbi to ggi is exemplified in abbia, aggia, may have, while that from ggi to cci is seen in staggia, staccia, a lath.—Fl.

Reprobate.—Reprove. See -prove.

Repudiate. Lat. repudium, a putting away one's wife. This, like pudor, shame, and refuto, to reject, refuse, is probably one of the words derived from the interjection fu! or pu! expressing in the first instance disgust at a bad smell, then dislike and rejection. G. anpfüien, verpfüien, to cry fie upon, to reject. By a similar figure the Lat. has respuo, to spit back, to refuse.

Repugnant. Lat. repugnare, to contrary one ; pugno, to fight. See Pugilist.

Requiem. Lat. requies, rest, repose, the accus. of which is requiem, the initial word of the service for the dead, whence the term is taken.

Reremouse. AS. hreremus, a bat, equivalent to G. flittermaus, from the fluttering of his wings, from AS. hreran, ON. hrara, to move. At hrara tungu, to wag the tongue ; —sverd, to brandish a sword.—Egils.

Rescind. Lat. rescindo, to cut off, abolish.
Rescue. OE. rescous, rescow, from OFr. rescouvrir, rescourre, to recover, redeem, deliver; whence rescous, recovered; rescouveur, one who redeems goods from the hands of creditors. It. riscuotere (Lat. re-excutere), to fetch a thing out of pawn, to exact payment; riscuotersi, to escape; riscossa, exaction of payment, recovery, retaking, rescuing, deliverance.—Altieri. Lat. excutere, to tear from, take away by force, to which corresponds OFr. escourre, to beat corn from the chaff, as rescourre to riscuotere.
Resemble. From Lat. similis, like, similare or simulare, to make like, to imitate; It. sembiare, semblare, Fr. sembler, to seem; Prov. resemblar, Fr. rassembler. It. rassembrare, to resemble.
Resort.—Resource. To resort, to repair or betake oneself to. Resource, something to apply back to for succour.—Fr. Fr. resortir, ressortir, to issue, go forth again, to resort, repair, to appeal from an inferior to a superior court. En dernier ressort, finally, without further appeal. Sans nul resort, without delay.—Fab. et Contes, II.
Diez would explain the meaning from It. sortire, to 'obtain or acquire, whence risortire would signify to get back, to recover, and thence to betake oneself to, on the same principle on which ricoverarsi signifies to have recourse to, to fly to for help. But risortire does not appear ever to have been used in the sense of recover, and we have no occasion for this hypothetical explanation.
The truth is, that Fr. ressort and resource are parallel forms with the same general meaning more or less directly derived from Lat. surgere, to rise. Hence It. sorgere, ppl. sorto, Fr. sourdre, ppl. sors, sours, to rise, spring, come out of; se resourdre, to spring up again, recover, come to one's former estate or vigour; resours, raised, recovered, got up again; ressource, a new spring, recovery, uprising, also refuge for succour. — Cot. From the other form of the participle, sorto, surto, are formed Cat. surt, a bound or spring; Ptg. surto, the spring upwards of a bird, Fr. essort, essour, essor, source, spring, flight; ressort, spring, elasticity, the spring which moves a piece of mechanism, and thence metaphorically, resource, supply of needful power. Il a fait jouer tous ses ressorts, he has used all his means, resources.—Tarver. From the substantive arises a secondary form of verb, Sp. surtir, to spring as water (Taboada), Ptg. surtir, to fly, to soar, Cat. surtir, to spring up, Fr. sortir, to go out. To resort to a thing is to have resource to it, to come back to it as the source or supply of what is wanting to meet the emergency.
Al I refuse but that I might resorte Unto my love, the well of goodlihede.
Chaucer.
The same met. sense is found in Prov. ressort.
Contra mort ressort ni cubatura.—against death there is neither resource nor protection.
Respite. Breathing time, delay, forbearance.—Fr. From Lat. respectus. It. rispetto, Prov. respieg, respeit, Fr. respit, regard, consideration, expectation, then respite, delay. 'Tout prent sans nul respit avoir : ' takes everything without regard for any consideration.—Fab. et Contes, 4. 445. ' Mando vobis ut respectetis benedictionem usque ad Pascham : ' should delay the blessing until Easter.—Eadmer. ' Et ainsi fut respoitiez li allers a Adrianople a cele fois : ' was put off.—Villehardouin.
Respond.—Response. Lat. spondeo, to promise, engage for; respondeo, to answer.
Rest. Two words are confounded.
1. From Lat. restare, to remain, to resist, stand firm, hold out; Fr. rester, to remain; reste, a remainder; It. restare, to remain, abide, or stay still in one place, to cease from, to leave or be left overplus.
2. From G. rast, Du. ruste, raste, ease, quiet, repose.
Restive.—Resty. It. restio, restive, resty, drawing back, loth to go as some horses, by met. slow, lazy.—Fl. Fr. restif, stubborn, drawing backward, that will not go forward.—Cot. From Lat. restare.
Restore. Lat. restaurare, to repair, remake. See Store.
Result. Lat. resulto, to leap back; re and sulto, a freq. of salio, to leap.
Resurrection. Lat. resurrectio, from resurgo, resurrectum, to rise again; re and surgo, to rise.
To Ret. To rait timber, to set it to soak.—Ray. Hay is raited—when it has been much exposed to wet and dry.—Hal. G. rösten, Pl.D. röthen, Du. rotten or rooten het vlasch, to ret flax, to steep it in water in order to separate the fibre by incipient rotting. Rettyn' tymber, hempe, or other lyke, rigo, infundo.—Pr. Pm.

The word is a mere modification of rot. Sw. rota, N. royta, to rot, putrefy, decay, to ret flax. Royte upp kleda, to rot clothes by much exposure to wet. Royte hamp, skinn, to set hemp or skins to soak in order to loosen the fibre in the one case and the hair in the other; royta, rottenness, long continuance of wet weather in which corn is in danger of rotting, also the steeping or stripping of goods.
Retail. Fr. retail, a shred or small piece cut from a thing.—Cot. Tailler, to cut.
Retaliate. Fr. talion, a pain equal to the harm done; retalionné, requited or paid back with the like.—Cot. Lat. talis, such.
To Retch. It. recere, Lang. raca, to vomit. AS. hrecan, Picard. raquer, N. rakja, to retch, hawk, spit. ON. hraki, spittle; Du. rachelen, to cough, to hawk and spit; Bret. roc'ha, roc'hella, to snore, to breathe with difficulty. It. recere l'anima, to breathe one's last, expresses the stertorous breathing of the death-bed.
The origin is a representation of the harsh raking noise made in forcing the breath through passages encumbered with viscous secretions.
Reticent. See Tacit.
Reticulate. Lat. reticulatus, made in the form of a (rete) net.
Retinue. Fr. retenir, to retain or hold land of a superior; retenue, a holding, a train of retainers or persons holding of or dependent upon one.
To Retire. Fr. retirer, to draw back; tirer, It. tirare, to draw, pull, strike; tiro, a throw, draught, stroke. Identified by Diez with Goth. tairan, to tear, on the principle on which we use tear for any violent action; to tear a paper down, to tear along the road. It must always be remembered that the original image from whence an expression is taken will commonly appear a gross caricature of the thing signified.
Retreat. Fr. retraite corresponding to a Lat. retracta, from retrahere, retractum, to withdraw.
To Retrench. Fr. retrancher, to cut off. See Trench.
To Retrieve. To recover, get again. See Contrive.
Retro-. Lat. retro, backwards, behind.
Reveal. Lat. revelare, to disclose, as if by throwing back (velum) a veil.
Revel. Commonly referred to Fr. reveiller, to waken, as if signifying one who keeps late hours. But reveiller is to awake, not to watch or sit up late. The real origin is in the notion of noisy merry-making. Swiss räbeln, to clatter, make a disturbance; gräbel, räblete, disturbance, uproar, confusion; räbelkilth, nocturnal assembly of young people. Bret. ribla, to revel, lead a dissipated life. Champ. ribler, to be out at night, lead a debauched life; revel, noise, disturbance, gaiety; reveaux, pleasures, debauches.

Plains est de joie et de revel.—Roquef.
Du. ravelen, raveelen, æstuare, fluctuare, et circumcursare et delirare, insanire, furere.—Kil. With a change of termination, ravotter, tumultuari et luxuriari, popinari, to riot, romp. Connected forms are Du. rabbelen, to gabble; Swiss raffeln, to rattle; Gael. ramhlair, a noisy fellow; ramhlaireachd, play or sport.
Revenge. Fr. revanche, requital, revenge. See Vengeance.
Revenue. Fr. revenir, to come back, to profit or yield increase; revenue, a return or coming again; revenue de bois, the new springing of wood after it has been lopped or felled.—Cot. In like manner revenue is applied to the yearly income from property in general.
Revere. — Reverend. Lat. vereor, revereor, to stand in awe of.
Reverie. When ideas float in our mind without any reflection or regard of the understanding, it is that which the French call resverie, our language has scarce a name for it.—Locke. Resver, to rave, dote, speak idly; resveur, a dotard or dreaming fop.—Cot. See Rave.
Revulsion. Lat. revulsio, a plucking back; vello, vulsum, to pull or pluck.
Rhapsody. Gr. ῥαψῳδία, a portion of an epic poem for recitation at one time; ῥάπτω, to stitch or link together, and ᾠδή, a song.
Rhetoric. Gr. ῥήτωρ, an orator; ἡ ῥητορική (τέχνη), the art of the public speaker.
Rheum-.—Rheumatism. Gr. ῥεῦμα, ῥευματισμός, from ῥέω, to flow, the idea being that there was an undue flow of rheum, or humour, through the part affected by the disorder termed Rheumatism.
Rhinoceros. Gr. ῥινόκερως; ῥίν, the snout, nose, and κέρας, a horn.
Rhomboid. Lat. rhombus, Gr. ῥόμβος, a lozenge, and εἶδος, form, fashion.
Rhyme. It. rima, Fr. rime, G. reim. Diez objects to the derivation from Gr. ῥυθμός, measure, proportion, regular movement, metre, rhythm, that it would have given rise to an It. rimmo or remmo instead of rima, and he is more inclined to OHG. rim, AS. rim, gerim, W. rhif, Bret. rimm, number. But in Fr., at least, there is no difficulty in the formation of rime from the older spelling rithme, rime or metre.—Cot. Rithmailler (rimailler), to rime paltrily.—Ibid. The term rithmicare was used in the sense of versifying long after the introduction of rhyme, and it is perfectly natural that rithmus, which signified metrical writing, should gradually have been applied to the rhyme which became its most striking characteristic. An Ars rithmicandi written in the 14th century begins as follows: Ad habendum artem rithmicandi et dictaminis notitiam sciendum est quid sit rithmus et ex quot syllabis constare debet—et ubi servanda est consonantia [the rhyme]. Rithmus est consona paritas syllabarum sub certo numero comprehensarum.—Reliq. Ant. i. 30. As consonantia is used throughout in the sense of rhyme, it seems that consona in the latter clause must be understood in the sense of rhyming, showing that in the apprehension of the author rhyme formed an essential element of rhythm.

Rib. Du. ribbe, a rib, beam, lath, rafter; G. rippe, rib; gerippe, Pl.D. rif, rift, sceleton.—Brem. Wtb. AS. hrif, the intestines, is probably what is contained in the framework of the ribs. Swab. raf, rafen, rafter or spar of a roof. The radical image seems to be a framework of rods or bars, perhaps originally from comparison with the parallel teeth of a comb or rake. G. raufe, raffel, riffel, an iron comb for plucking off the heads of flax-seed; raufe. Swab. raf, reff, the rack or lath-work which holds the hay for cattle, the cradle of a scythe. G. helmreife, the grate of a helmet or bars which protect the mouth.—Brem. Wtb. G. raufe, Bav. reff, reft, is also a basket made of rods for carrying on the back; reftrager, reftrer, higler, one who carries about fowls, eggs, butter, &c., on his back for sale. We have the same word in E. rip, a panier for carrying fish; ripper, one who carries about fish for sale. The foregoing supposition would unite W. crib, a comb, cribin, a hay-rake, Bret. cribin (as G. raufe, riffel), a comb for flax, with G. krippe, a crib, rack for cattle, any framework of rods or beams to be filled up with earth or stones. Das ufer krippen, to fasten a bank with stakes or piles, by which the earth is held together, as the soft parts of the body of an animal by the (gerippe) skeleton.

Ribald. OFr. ribault, ribauld. It. ribaldo, a name applied generally to any loose character. 'Fures, exules, fugitivi, excommunicati, quos omnes ribaldos Francia vulgariter consuevit appellare.'—Matt. Paris in Diez. Du. rabaud, scortator, lascivus, nequam, nebulo, mendicus fallax, aruscator.—Kil. It is probable that the original signification is nothing worse than a reveller or noisy companion, from Fr. rabalter, to rumble, rattle, make a terrible noise, as they say spirits do in some houses.—Cot. Du. ravotten, to riot, racket, lead an uproarious life.—Halma. Ravot, revot, caterva nebulonum et lupanar.—Kil. In ultimate formation the word is a representation of rattle, clatter, analogous to Piedm. rabadan, noise, uproar, clatter; or to E. rubadub, rowdydow, from the last of which is formed the American rowdy, a term exactly synonymous with OFr. ribauld.

Ribband.—Ribbon. Fr. ruban. From Du. rijghe, rije, a row or line; rijghen, to string, to lace; rijghband, rijghsnoer, rijghnestel, a lace, band, tie. Du. nestel, a lace or strap, is identical with It. nastro, a ribbon.

Rich. Prov. ric, noble, powerful, illustrious, rich; Sp. ricos hombres, magnates, grandees. Goth. reiks, ruler; reikinon, to rule. ON. riki, realm, power; rikia, to reign; rikdomr, riches. G. reich, empire, rich. Gael. righ, king; righich, govern. Lat. regere, rex, &c.

Rick. AS. hreac, ON. hraukr, especially applied to a heap of fuel; hreykia, to pile up. N. royk, rauk, a small heap, as of corn-sheaves in the field, or of turf.

Rickets. Mid. Lat. rachitis, disease of the spine. Gr. ῥάχις, the spine.

To Rid. ON. hrioða, to clear away; hroði, rubbish, what is cleared away; hroðit skip, a ship in which all the defenders are killed; riðr, a place cleared of wood, in E. commonly called riddings. Dan. rydde, to grub up, to clear; rydde op i en stue, to set a room to rights; rydnings-plads, a cleared place; rydde bort, rydde af veien, to clear away. G. reuten, Bav. rieden, to clear away, root out, extirpate; das ried, geried, rieder, riddings, place cleared of wood and bushes. Sc. red, to clear away, set in order, clearance, removal of obstructions; red, outred, rubbish. Pl.D. redden, G. retten, Dan. redde, to save or rescue, seems a wholly different word, signifying perhaps to snatch from danger. AS. hreddan, rapere, eripere.—Lye.

Riddle. 1. AS. hriddel, hridder, G. reiter, räder, Bret. ridel, W. rhidyll, Gael. rideal, a sieve, especially a corn-sieve. From the way in which a sieve is shaken whenever it is used. ON. rida, to tremble; AS. hrethadl, Du. ridde, a fever or shak-ing sickness; riideren, rijeren, rijelen, to shiver with fever or with cold.—Thes. Ling. Teut. E. dial, to rue, to ree, to sift—Hal.; Sc. ree, a small riddle. Bav. erridern, to shiver. The primary origin seems to be the representation of a rust-ling or rattling sound. G. ratteln, to sift. Bav. rodel, a tin box with pebbles in it; rodeln, rudeln, to shake, to stir; G. rüt-teln, to shake, sift, winnow corn. Gr. κρόταλον, a rattle; Gael. crith, tremble, shake, quiver. AS. hriscian, to make a rustling noise, to shake, frizzle.

2. AS. rædelse, an imagination, a riddle. 'Se leasa wena and sio rædelse thara dysigra monna:' the false opinion and the imagination of foolish men. OHG. ratsal, ratisca, ratissa, rätersch, radisli, a riddle. Rat mir dise rätschen, read me this riddle. Bav. räten, G. errathen, rathen, ON. ráda, to conjecture, divine, make out, imagine. Rathe was ist das, guess what is that. Dan. raade, to divine, devise. Raade bod paa, to devise a remedy for. See Read.

To Ride. ON. reida, to sway, lift, weigh, brandish, move up and down. Lá reidir buk, the tide carries the corpse. Skip reidduz, the ships were borne on the waves. A ship rides at anchor when she is borne up and down by the waves with-out changing place. ON. rida, to be borne on a horse or in a ship. Rida kjöl, to be carried in a ship. To be borne or carried aloft as a standard, a sword, an axe. N. rida, to sway to and fro as a boat resting on a stone. Du. rijden, to ride on horseback, to be borne in a car-riage, to slide on the ice. Parallel with reida and rida are ON. leiða, to lead, and liða, to be borne. At liða í lopti, to be borne through the air. Du. lijden, to slide, to pass by. -ride. -ris-. Ridicule. Lat. rideo, risum, to laugh; as in Deride, Derision, Lat. ridiculus, what moves to laughter. Ridge. AS. hricg, ON. hryggr, Pl.D. rugge, Dan. ryg, G. rücken, the back. Then anything formed like the back of an animal, a long horizontal line from which the surface slopes down on either side.

Riding. In Domesday, triding, one of the divisions of three into which the county of York is broken up. ON. Thridjungr, N. tridjung, a third part. The initial t was probably lost, as Müller suggests, in consequence of the difficulty of recognising the sound in the com-pounds North-, East-, and West-trithing, in which the word would principally occur.

Rife. Du. rijf, copious, abundant. ON. rifr, ríflegr, liberal, munificent; rífka, to increase. In the N. of E. ripe, prevalent, abundant.—Hal. Riffraff. Refuse, dregs, scum of any-thing.—B. Rif and raf, tag rag and bobtail, every atom, scrapings and all. King Richard it wan and tille his sister it gaf, The Sarrazins ilk man heslough alle rif and raf. R. Brunne in R. Il ne lui lairra rif ni raf, he will strip him of all. On n'y a laissé ni rifle ni rafle, they have swept it all away.—Cot. It. raffola-ruffola, riff-raff, by hook or by crook. Lomb. o de riff o de raff, in one way or another. See Raff.

Rifle. A rifle is a gun having a barrel internally grooved or scored in a spiral in order to make the bullet revolve. Pl.D. rifeln, to streak, to furrow. Dan. rijle, to groove a column. See To Rifle, Rive. To Rifle. Fr. rifler, to rifle, ransack, sweep all away before him. Du. rijfelen, to scrape, rub, seize. It. raffa, a raffling, rifling; raffio, any hook or crook, a rake, a drag; raffolare, to rake, drag, scrape together by hook or by crook; ruffolare, ruffaae, to rifle, to filch or pilfer craftily. Lombard ruff, sweepings, dirt. See Raffle.

Rift. A cleft, chink, crack.—B. From rive. To Rig. * 1. N. rigga, to rig a ves-sel. Perhaps a metaphor from harness-ing a horse. Sw. dial, rigga på, to har-ness a horse. From rygg, the back? 2. To rig about, to be wanton, to romp; rig, a wanton, romping girl; riggish, rampant, ruttish.—B. The wanton gesticulations of a virgin in a wild assembly of gallants warmed with wine, could be no other than riggish and unmaidenly.—Bp Hall in R. Probably from the excited movements of animals under sexual impulse, as in-dicated under Ramble. N. rugga, rigga, rugla, rigla, to rock or waver; E. wrig-gle. Manx reagh, ruttish, wanton, merry, sportive, lecherous; riggan, to rut; rig-gyl, as E. rig, ridgil, ridgeling, a ram imperfectly castrated, and consequently liable to sexual excitation. To play reaks, to run a rig, to act in an excited manner, to do something outrageous. Right. AS. riht, Goth. raihts, G. recht, Lat. rectus, straight, stretched out; porrigo, to stretch out; dirigo, to stretch towards a definite point. Gr. ὀρέγω, to stretch.

The meaning of right is always a metaphor more or less direct from the image of straightness. The right course is that which leads in a straight line to the object sought for. Moral right is that which has to be done, which lies in the straight way to satisfy the conscience. The right hand is the hand it is right to make use of.

Rigid.—Rigour. Lat. rigidus, rigor; rigeo, to be stiff. ON. rigr, stiffness.

Rigmarole. A repetition of idle words, a succession of long foolish stories—Worcester; a confused, unconnected discourse.—Hal. There can be little doubt that it is a corruption of ragman-roll, which was used in a very similar sense.

Tindall—hath in the handling of that one matter alone utterly destroyed the foundation of all the heresies they have in their whole raggemans rolle.—Sir T. Moore.

In the play of Juditium, Towneley Mysteries, p. 311, Tutivillos, one of the devils who had been employed in catching people sinning, and comes to make his report, says:

Here a rolle of ragman of the rownde tabille Of breffes in my bag, man, of synnes dampnabille.

The origin of the term has been made out by Mr Wright in his Anecdota Litteraria. The name was originally given to a game consisting in drawing characters from a roll by strings hanging out from the end, the amusement arising from the application or misapplication of the characters to the persons by whom they were drawn.

A roll of this kind, from MS. Fairfax 16, is printed by Mr Wright:

Here begynnyth Ragmane roelle, My ladyes and my maistresses echone Lyke hit unto your humbyl womanhede, Resave in gre of my sympill persone This rolle, which withouten any drede Kynge Ragman me bad serve in brede, And cristened it the merour of your chaunce. Drawith a strynge, and that shall streyght you leyde Unto the very path of your governaunce.

The popularity of the amusement is shown by the familiar allusion of Gower:

Venus whiche stant withoute lawe In non certeyne, but as men drawe Of Ragemon upon the chaunce, She leyeth no peys in the balaunce.

MS. in Hal.

The name of Ragman is given to the devil in P. P., and he is probably made to preside at our game as the father of sorcery. Sw. raggen, the devil.

From the strings hanging out at the end of the roll by which the characters were drawn, the name of ragman-roll was given to any deed with a number of seals hanging to it, and especially to the indentures by which the Scottish Barons were made to subscribe allegiance to Ed. I., and of which a record was kept in four large rolls of parchment preserved in the Tower.

Unum instrumentum sive cartam subjectionis et homagii faciendi regibus Angliæ—a Scottis propter multa sigilla dependentia ragman vocabatur.—Chronicon de Lanercost in Wright.

Swa thai consentyd than And mad upon this a ragman With many seals of Lordis, thare That that tyme at this tretté ware.—Wyntown.

There preached a pardoner as he a priest were, Brought forth a bull with many bishops seales; He raughte with his ragman both ringes and broches.—P. P.

Rill. A trickling stream, from the sense of trickling, explained under To Rail, 2.

Aganippe's spring—with soft murmurs gently rilling Adown the mountains where thy daughters haunt.—Prior.

Pl.D. rille, a little stream or watercourse, such as those which the rain makes in running off meadows, or the tide retiring from mud-banks.

Rim. AS. rima, margin, edge. The rime of the sea was used for the surface of the sea.

The weeds being so long that riding in fourteen fathoms water, many times they streamed three or four fathoms upon the ryme of the sea.—Hawkins' Voyage, p. 116.

It is perhaps in this sense that the membrane enclosing the bowels is called the rim. Sw. and Dan. bryn is used as well in the sense of edge or border as of surface. Dan. bryn, the ryme or surface of the sea, also the brow or rim of the eye. G. augenbraune, the eyebrow, is in other dialects augenbramen. Thus rim, brim, and bryn, must be regarded as radically identical. N. bryning, Dan. bræmme, a border or edging, W. rhim, rhimp, edge, rim.

Rime. G. reif, Du. rijpe, rijm, Sw. rim, hoarfrost. ON. hrim, soot, hoarfrost.

Bret. frimm, Fr. frimas, mist which freezes in falling.
Rimple. — Rumple. — Ripple. AS. hrympel, Du. rimpe, rimpel, rompe, rompel, a wrinkle, rumple, pucker. Words representing a broken sound are commonly applied to signify a broken movement, then a broken, uneven, rugged surface. The gentle sound of small waves breaking on the shore is represented by the word ripple, which is then applied to the uneven surface of the rippling water, and rimple is used in the same sense.
As gilds the moon the rimpling of the brook.
Crabbe in R.
Pl.D. rumpeln, originally signifying to rumble, to clatter, is now chiefly used in the applied sense of jolting, jogging.
Rumpelgeest, as G. poltergeist, a clattering ghost.
De Bank rumpelt mi, my belly rumbles.
De wage rumpelt up dem steenwege, the carriage clatters along the road, or jolts along.
Ik kan dat rumpeln niet verdragen, I cannot endure the jolting.
Rumpumpeln, to jolt excessively.
Du. rompelig, uneven, rugged. Then as a shaking motion throws a surface into confusion, to rumple, to disorder, disarrange, crumple. See Rumble, Rumpus.
To Rince. Fr. rincer, ON. hreinsa, Dan. rense, to cleanse. ON. hrein, G. rein, Dan. reen, pure, clean.
Rind. Du. G. rinde, crust, bark.
Ring. ON. hringr, a circle, a ring ; kringr, a circle. Dan. kringel, krinkel, crooked, twisted ; kringle, to go in folds, to run round. E. crinkle, to curl. The connection of the foregoing forms with ON. hringla, to tinkle, is probably based on the principle so often referred to on which a crooked, curling form is designated by the figure of a broken or quavering sound. W. crychlais, a quivering voice ; crychiad, a shake in music ; crych, a curling, wrinkling, rippling.
To Ring. ON. hringia, to ring bells ; hringla, to clink, ring, tingle. Hann hringlar gialldi, he chinks his money. Dan. ringle, klingre, to ring, tinkle. All imitative.
Riot. Fr. rioter, Bret. riota, to chide, brawl, jangle ; Gael. raoit, indecent mirth. It. riotta, riot, brawl ; Du. ravotten, tumultuari, et luxuriari, popinari ; ravot, revot, caterva nebulonum, et lupanar, luxus, luxuria.—Kil. Ravotterig, bruit, tintamarre, charivari.—Halma.
A similar word to Fr. rabater, mentioned under Ribald.
Rip. I. A panier for fish. See Rib.
2. A name applied to men and boys, and even to animals if they appear to be lean, half-starved, or otherwise ill-conditioned.—Hal. A rip of a horse is a thin, worn-out horse. Pl.D. rif, rift, a skeleton. G. gerippe, a skeleton. He is een rift, so mager as een rift.—Brem. Wtb. E. rip is also applied metaphorically to a morally ill-conditioned person.
To Rip. I. To tear. Ultimately derived from the sound of scratching or tearing. See Raffle. ON. hrifa, to scrape, to snatch ; rifa, riufa, to tear ; Du. roopen, reupen, ruppen, G. raufen, to pluck ; Fr. friper, to rub, to wear ; fripon, a rag.
2. ON. at rippa upp, Dan. oprippe, to rip up, to go over again, to repeat. Jeg ei oprippe vil det som jeg for har sagt : I will not repeat what I have said before. Du. Die zaak werd niet gerept ; men repte van die zaak niet : they did not make mention of the thing.
When each party had ripped up their sundry fortunes and perils passed, they highly praised God.—Hackluyt in R.
It has been shown under Rehearse that the figure of raking is often used to express iteration. ON. hrifa, a rake, also iteration. To rip and to rake up old grievances are used indifferently.
Ripe. Du. rijp, G. reif.
To Ripe. To rake, to probe, and thence met. to search or examine.
Then fling on coals and ripe the ribs And beek the house baith but and ben.
Ramsay.
All the hyrnis of his goist He rypit with his swerd amid his coist, So til his hart stoundith the prick of death.
It is from this sort of action that a sword is called in Sp. raspadera, Fr. rapière, a raker or rasper. Esthon. riipma, to rake.
See To Rip.
Ripple. See Rimple.
To Ripple. To pluck off the heads of flax seeds by drawing the straw through a fixed iron comb. Walach. grebla, a comb or rake. Fris. rebbel, Dan. ribbel, a frame with iron teeth through which thrashed straw is drawn and combed to save any remnants of the corn.—Outzen. G. raufen, rupfen, Swiss rüpfeln, to pluck ; G. raufen, räufeln, to ripple flax ; raufe, reffe, raufel, reffel, riffel, the comb used in that operation. Pl.D. repen, reppen, repeln, to rip, pluck, tear, to ripple flax ; repe, a rack for hay ; repe, repel, a ripple. Dan. rive, to rake, rive, tear, rasp.
To Rise. ON. risa, to rise ; Goth. urreisan, AS. arisan, to rise up ; reosan, to rush, to fall. Du. riisen, opriisen, to rise up ; riisen, afriisen, to sink, to fall. OHG. risan, to fall ; anarisan, irruere ; arrisan, corruere, surgere ; zarisan, dealbi, ruinari.—Graff. Regenes tropphen risente in erda, rain-drops falling on the earth.—Notker, Ps. 71. 6. Bav. reisen, to fall ; reisuhr, an hour-glass, marking time by the trickling of the sand. Swiss riesen, rauschend herabfallen; laubriesi, laubriesete, the fall of the leaf.

The radical image seems to be the rustling sound of fragments falling to the ground, which is represented by such forms as Bav. riseln, Swiss rieselen, to fall in drops, in little bits. Es riselet, cadit nivosa grando. Der risel, hail.—Schmeller. Swiss rieslete, stones rattling down a hill-side; riesobsi, worm-eaten fruit that falls prematurely. Sometimes the imitative syllable begins with gr or dr instead of a simple r, as in G. grieseln, to fall in bits ; Fr. gresiller, to fall in rime; grésil, hail ; Swiss droseln, troseln, to patter down ; E. drizzle. To these latter forms are related Goth. driusan, AS. dreosan, to fall, in the same way as OHG. risan to riseln. Gr. δρόσος, Lith. rasas, Lat. ros, dew, probably owe their designation to being originally conceived as what drizzles or falls in a fine shower. Bav. es reisst nebel, a drizzling mist falls.

The direction of the motion in the act of falling being often expressed by a preposition, as when we speak of falling down, tumbling down, coming pattering down, it was a natural device to designate motion in the opposite direction by the same radical with a preposition of opposite signification : Du. afriisen, to fall down ; opriisen, to rise up. In English, where the compound signifying to fall was wanting, the addition of the preposition in the compound expressing the opposite idea would appear superfluous, and thus it may have been that the simple verb to rise has come to include the signification of motion upwards which it originally owed to union with a preposition indicating that relation.

Risible, -ris-. See -ride.

Risk. Fr. risque, It. risico, risco, Sp. riesgo, risk. Bret. riska, riskla, to slip or slide ; riskuz, slippery. A slippery path affords a lively image of risk or danger. So Gael. sgiorr, slip, slide, run a risk ; sgiorrach, apt to slip or stumble, running a risk.—Armstrong.

Rissoles. Fr. rissoler, to fry meat till it is brown.—Cot. From the rustling noise of frying. Dan. risle, to purl, murmur ; Swiss riesen, riesenen, krachen.

zitternd rauschen—Stalder ; Swab. risselen, to rustle, shake in the wind ; Sc. reissil, a clattering noise.

Rite.—Ritual. Lat. ritus, a custom, ceremony, established order of proceeding.

Rival. Lat. rivalis, explained in different ways from rivus, a brook ; by some from the struggles between herdsmen using the same watercourses ; by others as signifying those who dwell on opposite sides of the stream.

To Rive.—Rift, -reave. Ryvyn' or rakyn', rastro ; ryvyn' or reendyn', lacero ; ryvyn' or clyvyn', as men doo woodde, findo ; revyn', or be vyolence take awey, rapio.—Pr. Pm. ON. rifa, to scratch, tear, tear asunder ; Sw. rifwa, to scratch, tear, claw, to grate, to grind. Rifwa af, to tear, pull, strip off; —sonder, to tear to pieces ; N. riva, to scratch, tear, tear to pieces ; riva. Da. rive, a rake ; riva. Da. revne, rift, a rift, crack, split. See To Rob.

Rivel. Wrinkle. Riveling, turning in and out.—B. w. of E. to reeve, to wrinkle.—Hal. Du. ruyffelen, to wrinkle. Closely allied with rabble, nibble, rumple, rimple, ripple, ruffle, ravel, all from the radical figure of a broken confused noise, leading to the notion of a jolting irregular movement, then of a rugged, rumpled, or entangled structure. Grisons rabaglia, a wrinkle ; teila rabagliada, rumpled, tumbled cloth. E. ravelled, entangled. Parallel forms with an a and i in the radical syllable are very common.

River. OFr. riviere, shore ; from Lat. riparia, derivative from ripa, bank. It. riviera, coast. Ptg. ribeira, meadow, low land on the bank of rivers, shore, coast ; ribeiro, a stream.

Rivet. From Lat. ripa, shore, bank, are formed Lang. ribo, Fr. rive, edge, border, strip along the edge of anything ; rivet, Lang. ribe, the welt of a shoe, the strip of leather turned in between the upper leather and the sole, to which they both are fastened ; Sp. Ptg. ribete, border, seam, binding, the doubling down at the edge of a garment. Welt of a shoe, rivet d'un Soulier.—Sherwood. Hence Fr. river, Ptg. rebitar (for ribetar), to double back the edge or point of a thing, to rivet or clench a nail ; river un lit (in Berri), to tuck in a bed ; rebitar o chapeo, to cock or turn up the brim of the hat ; naris arrebitado, a turned-up nose. It. ribadire, to clench a nail. In Craven rebbit, Sc. roove, ruiff, to clench, to rivet. It is not surprising that the word should have been referred to a root which would account for the meaning so well as It. *ribattere*, Fr. *rebattre*, to beat back, turn back the extremity, but such a derivation would destroy the connection between Fr. *river* and E. *rivet*, nor could It. *ri- battere* have been corrupted to *ribadire*.
Rivulet. A double dim. from Lat. *rivus*, a brook.
Road. From *ride*, pret. *rode*, a way through which men ride. An *inroad* is a riding into an enemy's country; a *road* at sea (Fr. *rade*, Du. *reede*), a place where ships may ride at anchor.
To Roam. It. *romeo*, *romero*, OFr. *romier*, a pilgrim, one who makes a pil- grimage to Rome. *Chiamansi romei in- quanto vanno a Roma*.—Dante, *Vita nuova*. From *romeo* is formed It. *romie- are*, *romiare*, to roam or wander about as a palmer.—Fl. The verb to roam how- ever could hardly have come to us direct from the It., and it does not seem to have had a Fr. equivalent. I am inclined therefore to believe that it is from G. *raum*, E. *room*, space, analogous to Lat. *spatiari*, G. *spazieren*, to walk abroad, from *spatium*.
The usual signification of ON. *ryma*, G. *räumen*, Du. *ruimen*, is to clear a space, to make or leave room.
Hii alijte with drawe suerd, with matis mony on, And with many an hard stroc *rümede* her way anon, Vort hii come up to the deis.—R. G. 536.
AS. *rym thysum manne setl* : give this man place. *—Luc* 14, 9. Pl.D. *ruum hus maken*, to vacate a house. The verb was then used in the special sense of leaving home, wandering abroad.
*Uuanda andere fogela rüment, sparo ist heime* : when other birds quit the nest, the sparrow remains at home.—Notker, Ps. 101, 7. Hence OSw. *rum*, abroad ; *wara rumme*, to be abroad, as opposed to *wara hemma*, to be at home.—Ihre. From this application may be explained the use of roam in the usual sense of wandering abroad.
Roan. Fr. *rouen*, It. *roano*, Sp. *ruano*, *roano*, the colour of a horse having a mixture of bay and grey hairs.
To Roar. AS. *raran*, Du. *reeren*, from the sound.
Roast. It. *rosta*, a frying-pan; *rostire*, Fr. *rostir*, to roast, broil, toast. G. *rost*, a grate, trellis, a gridiron. *Feuerrost*, a fire grate ; *bratrost*, a gridiron ; *helm- rost*, the grate of a helmet ; *rösten*, to dress meat on a gridiron, to broil, fry, and more generally to roast or toast. Pol. *roszt*, a grate ; *roszczka*, a rod, twig, small branch. A grate is a collection of parallel or interlaced rods. See Roost.
Rob. It. *robbo*, Fr. *rob*, Arab. *robb*, the thickened juice of fruits.
To Rob. Goth. *biraubon*, to strip or spoil ; Prov. *raubar*, OFr. *rober*, Sp. *robar*. It. *rubare*, Du. *rooven*, Dan. *rove*, E. *reave*, *bereave*, to take by violence, to plunder, rob. The Gael. *reub* has the simpler sense of rend, tear, pull asunder, but the meaning is completely developed in the derivatives *reubainn*, *robann*, *ra- pine* ; *reubair*, *robair*, a robber. MHG. *rouben* signifies both to rob and to *rub*, and it is probable that the differ- ence between these two forms has only arisen from the tendency, which may often be observed in the growth of lan- guage, to distinguish variations in the application of a term by slight changes in the pronunciation of the word. Thus Grisons *rapar*, to rub, and Du. *raepen*, to scrape, will be connected with Lat. *rapere*, to rob. The senses of rubbing, scrubbing, scraping, scratching, tearing, gradually pass into each other, and acts of this kind being accompanied by a pe- culiar harsh sound, while the effect of the action when sufficiently forcible is to tear away a portion of the body operated on, it furnishes language with a conve- nient type of robbery. Dan. *rive* and Sw. *rifwa* are used in all the foregoing senses, to rasp, scrape, rake, rub, rend. *Rive farver*, to grind colours ; *rive noget af eens haand*, to snatch a thing out of one's hand ; *en rivende ström*, a rapid stream. Sw. *rifwa af*, to tear away, to take by violence. G. *raffen*, to rake to- gether, to take away everything by force and violence.—Küttn. Bret. *krafa*, *krava*, *skraba*, *skrapa*, signify to scrape or scratch, and also to seize, steal, rob.
Robbins. G. *raabanden*, small ropes on board a ship that fasten the sail to the yard, from ON. *rá*, Sw. *ra*, a sail-yard, and *band*, a tie.
Robe. It. *roba*, any robe or long upper garment for man or woman, also goods, stuff, merchandise.—Fl. Fr. *robe*, a gown, mantle, coat. Sp. *ropa*, cloth, clothes. The name is undoubtedly taken from the notion of stripping, whether it be from the fact that clothes originally consisted in skins stripped from the backs of ani- mals or that they were regarded as what might be stripped off the wearer. Prov. *raubar*, to rob ; *rauba*, garment, spoil. Du. *rooven*, to spoil ; *roof*, spoils, plunder ; roof van't schaep, a fleece. AS. reaflan, to rob or spoil ; reaf, garment, spoil, plunder. Lith. rubas, a garment ; rubiti, to plunder, also to clothe. It has indeed been supposed that the derivation runs in the opposite direction, and that the act of robbing takes its name from the clothes which would constitute the earliest subject of plunder. And it must be admitted that such a relation of ideas seems to hold good in the case of Prov. pan, cloth, panar, to rob or steal. But it is incompatible with the relations established in the case of the verb to rob.

Robin. The most familiar of our wild birds, called Robin-red-breast (from Robin, the familiar version of Robert), on the same principle that the pie and the daw are christened Mag (for Margery) and Jack. In the same way the parrot takes its name from Pierrot, the familiar version of Pierre, Peter.

Robust. Lat. robustus ; robur, vigour, strength.

Rochet. It. rochetto, a garment of plaited lawn worn by bishops. Central Fr. rochet, a smock-frock. From G. rock, a coat. See Frock.

Rock. I. ON. rockr, OHG. rocco. It. rocca, a distaff. The origin of the term seems preserved in Fin. and Lap. ruoko, a reed, from the distaff having been made of that material. Thus Legonidec in explaining Bret. kegel, a distaff, observes ' ce bâton est ordinairement un roseau,' and Altieri explains rocca, ' strumento di canna o simile.'

2. It. rocca, Fr. roc, a rock, crag, cliff, a fortress or stronghold ; roche, rocher, a rock, stony crag or hill. Bret. roc'h, a rock ; rodhel, a mass of stone. Diez' suggestion of a derivation from rupes through a form rupica, analogous to avica, natica, cutica, from avis, natis, cutis, is not satisfactory. Probably the original may be merely a lump, then a small piece of stone for throwing. Fr. rocque, lump of earth—Roquef. ; It. rocchio, any round rugged stone, any unpolished lump or mass of stone or earth, any mammock or luncheon piece. Rocchino, a piece of an eel or other fish baked in a pie. Rocchetto, a bobbin (a short piece of stick ?) to wind silk upon. Cat., Lim., roc, a stone for throwing ; OFr. rocher, to throw stones.

To Rock. Dan. rokke, N. rugga, to rock, shake, vacillate ; rugla, to waver, go up and down. E. dial, to rog, roggle, to shake ; roggan, a rocking-stone ; OFr. rocquer un enfant, to rock a child. G. ruck, a shake, toss, or jerk. Dem tische einen ruck geben, to give the table a shove. The original image would seem to be a broken sound, as represented by Sw. rockla, N. rukla, to rattle in the throat. See Ruck, Rugged.

Rocket. It. rocca, a rock or distaff ; rocchello, rochetto, a rocket or bobbin to wind silk on ; also the wheel about which the cord of a clock or jack goeth ; also any kind of rocket or squib of wildfire.—Fl. The distaff was commonly made of reed, and with its clothing of flax offered a familiar resemblance to a barrel-wheel with the cord of the jack round it, or to a quill or bobbin wound round with silk. From these the appellation is transferred to a firework contained in a hollow case or cylinder.

Rod. Du. roede, G. ruthe, a rod. Walach. ruda', a pole or stick, the pole of a carriage, a stick of sealing-wax.

Rodent, -rosion. —rode. Lat. rodo, rosum, to gnaw. As in Corrosion, Erode.

Rodomontade. A boasting speech such as those of Rodomonte in Italian Romance.

Roe. I. ON. rá, G. reh, a small kind of deer.

2. ON. hroga, Sw. rog, rom, Du. roghe, roghen, the eggs of fish.

-rogate. — Rogation. — Prorogue. Lat. rogo, -as, to ask. Rogare legem, to propose a law. Hence abrogare, to abrogate, annul ; prorogo, to adjourn ; derogo, to withdraw something from ; surrogo (sub-rogo), to substitute, whence surrogate, an official authorised to grant licences in the place of the Bishop.

Rogue. To rogue, to wander round the country. Fr. divaguer, to stray, range, rogue about, wander inconstantly up and down.—Cot. Fye on thee, thou taynted doge ! What, laye thou still in that stonde. And let that losinger go on the roge ? Chester Plays II. 94, in Hal. Apparently an equivalent of Fr. roder, to roam, wander, vagabondise it, rogue abroad (Cot.), from Prov. rodar (Lat. rotare), to roll, as N. ralla, to roll, also to tramp about. The Prov. has a secondary form rogar, in the same sense, from whence E. rogue seems to be descended in the same way as Fr. roder from rodar. Peyras y rogan molt espes : stones roll there thickly. Swiss rugeln, to roll ; E. dial, to ruggle about, to stir about.

To Roil.—Rile. 1. To roil, to disturb, trouble, vex.—Hal. To rile, to render turbid, to vex, disturb—Brockett, to stir up liquor and make it turbid by moving the sediment, figuratively applied both to the temper and complexion; a riled complexion is one coarsely ruddy.—Forby. 'How roiled th& water looks :' i. e. muddy.—Mrs Baker. The word seems to signify lees or sediment. Ryall, fome or barm, spuma.—Pr. Pm. Riall of wine, fome, brouée, fleur.—Palsgr. Cot. explains fleur de vin as mother of wine, the mouldy spots that float on old wine.
2. To roil, to range.—B.
Man shall not suffre his wife roil about. Wife of Bath, Prol. 680.
' Don't roil about so' is often said to restless children.—Mrs Baker. ON. róla, to wander about ; N. ralla, to roll, also to vagabondise ; Bav. rallen, to run about. Swab. rollen, to be noisily merry ; roller, a rambler, a Tom-cat. Swiss rollen, to run hither and thither, to toy, dally, romp.
To Roist.—Roisterer. To roist, to swagger or boast ; roisting, noisy, bullying ; roister, a rude, boisterous fellow.—B. Gloucestersh. to roust, to disturb, to rouse.—Hal. Sw. rusta, to make a rout or disturbance ; rustande, noise, bustle, banqueting, dissolute life ; rustare, a dissolute fellow. Piedm. rustl, to squabble, quarrel ; rustlon, a quarrelsome person. Fr. rustre, a roister, hackster, swaggerer.—Cot. Bret. rouestl, tumult, disturbance ; rouestler, reustler, a disturber. Gael. riastair, become turbulent or disorderly.
Perhaps the representative origin of the word is clearest in Pl.D. rastern, to clatter, do a thing noisily. In't hus rümm rastern, to racket about the house.—Danneil. Holstein rastern, to rattle ; rasterer, one who makes an outcry, speaks with much noise.
To Roll. It. rotolare, Venet. rodolare, Prov. rodolar, rotlar, rollar, Fr. rouler, Du. G. rollen, ON. rulla, Dan. rulle, Bret. rula, W. rholio, to roll.
The origin of the word seems to be the rattling sound which is so marked a characteristic of rolling bodies, and remains as the only meaning of the word when we speak of the roll of the drum or of thunder. Swiss rollen (of a stream of water), to brawl, to murmur. Dan. ralle, to rattle ; Da. dial. rallesteen, loose rolling stones, rubble ; ralde, to rattle along, to roll rattling along. Bret. rula, to roll down, to fall rolling.
If we were to adopt the ordinary derivation from Lat. rota, we must suppose that the Scandinavian and Teutonic forms above cited are borrowed from the Romance, a supposition, in the case of the Scandinavian forms at least, extremely unlikely. On the other hand, if the origin of the word be the representation of a rattling or rolling sound, it would conversely afford a derivation of rota, a wheel, as the implement of rolling, on the principle in accordance with which we have in other cases had occasion to observe that words of an imitative nature often seem to take their birth in the frequentative form, from which the element indicating continuation is subsequently eliminated.
Romance. The name of Roman was given to the popular language, Spanish, Provençal, French, &c., which grew out of Latin in the different provinces of the Empire, and the name is preserved in the native designation of the dialects spoken in the Grisons and in Wallachia, Rumonsch or Rumauntsch, and Romanesca. The Walloon dialect was (in Ducange's time) called by the Belgians la langue Romane, and the parts of Flanders and Brabant where it was spoken, le Roman pays. In Sp. the expression hablar en Romance signifies to speak in plain Spanish, to speak in plain words. A chronicle of A. D. 1177, speaking of translations into French, says, ' Multos libros et maximè vitas sanctorum de Latino vertit in Romanum. ' In Provencal we find Latin called letra, the letter or learned language, in opposition to Roman, the language of ordinary speech. ' Aquest peccat es epelat en letra presomptio, mas en Romans se deu apelar folia esperansa.
From the name of the language were formed Ptg. arromangar, Prov. romansar, Fr. romancier, to translate into or to write in the vulgar tongue ; and romans, romance, roman, a writing in that language. ' Lo libre que vos ay de Lati romansat :' the book which I have translated out of Latin into (in this case) Provencal. ' Cel que vola romansar la vida Sant' Alban :' he who chose to write in the vulgar tongue the life of St Alban.—Rayn. The name of Romance was subsequently appropriated in different countries to different kinds of writings, according to the form which the popular literature took in each. In Spanish it came to signify a ballad. In English, where the literature began with translations from the French, the name was commonly given to the French original, but was subsequently used in the sense the word had acquired in French, of a story of fiction.
Whan Philip tille Acres cam, litelle was his dede, The romance sais grete sham, whoso that pas will rede.
The romancer it sais, Richard did make a pele. R. Brunne, 118.
Men speken of romaunces of pris, Of Hornchild, and of Ipotis, Of Bevis and Sir Guy.—Sir Thopas.

Romp. See Ramp.
Ronyon. A mangy person. Fr. rogne, scurf, scabbiness, mange.
Rood. 1. Mid. Lat. virgata, a measure of land, from the rod used in measuring. Du. roede, a rod, a measure of ten feet in land-surveying.
2. AS. ród, the cross ; Fris. rode, gal-lows, cross. G. ruthe (the equivalent form) is by no means confined to such a slender shoot as that to which we commonly give the name of rod in E., but is applied to the beam of an anchor, and specially to the swipe of a well, or long transverse pole working at the top of an upright support which seems (as we have argued) to have furnished the original type of a gibbet.
Roof. AS. hrof, ODu. roef, Russ. krov, krovlé, roof. Serv. krovnat, thatch-ed ; krovnaisch, a straw hut.
Rook. 1. AS. hroc, Du. roek, roekvogel, not (as Kilian supposes) from the sooty colour of the bird (Du. roek, smoke), but from its croaking cry. Gael. ròc, cry hoarsely, croak ; ròcas, a rook, a crow. Lat. raucus, hoarse.
2. It. rocco, Fr. roc, the rook or castle at chess, from Pers. rokh, a camel.—Diez.
Room. Goth. rûms, space, place, spacious ; ON. rûm, AS. rûm, G. raum, Lith. rûmas, space.
Roost. AS. hrost, Du. roest, sedile avium, pertica gallinaria.—Kil. Plausibly explained by some from Du. rust, G. rast, rest. Dan. dial. roste, to rest ; solrôst, sunset. But the true meaning of the word seems to be simply that indicated by Kilian, the rod or perch on which the bird settles itself to rest. Traces of this fundamental meaning may be found in the proverbial expression to rule the roast, where the word must probably be understood as the rod, the emblem of authority ; to rule or wield the rod.
This yeir sall richt and reason rule the rod. New Year's gift to Q. Mary, in Evergreen.
To fall down at the roist, in the Flyting of Kennedy and Dunbar, can only have the sense of kissing the rod or submitting to authority.
Thou raw-mou'd rebald, fall down at the roist— Say Deo mercy, or I cry thee down ; And leave thy ryming, rebald, and thy rows.
From the same source are G. rost, a grating or framework of rods, Sc. roost, the spars forming the inner roof of a cot-tage, OSax. hrost, roof. See Roast.
Root. ON. rót.
To Root. AS. wrotan, Du. wroeten, Dan. rode, to root as a pig or a mole. N. rota, to dig, to dabble ; rot, digging, labouring in mud and dirt, long-continued and wearisome work. Then from the use of the snout by a pig in rooting (and not vice versa), AS. wrot, G. rüssel, a snout ; Du. rote, an elephant's trunk. Pol. ryć, Bohem. ryti, rypati, to dig, to root, to en-grave ; ryjak, rypak, a snout. Pol. rycie, the act of digging, burrowing, rooting as swine, also of engraving ; rytować, to en-grave.
Rope. ON. reip, Pl.D. reep, rope ; Goth. skaudaraip, shoe-tie ; Du. reep, roop, rope, cord, strip or band, hoop ; angelreep, a fishing-line.
The analogy of E. strap, It. stroppa, Du. stroop, a noose or cord ; G. strippe, strap, string (Flügel), in the first instance probably a strip or narrow piece of bark stripped from a tree (Du. stroopen, to strip), would lead us to suspect a similar origin of the word rope, which may have served to designate a band ripped from a surface of some stringy material. G. reif, rope, hoop ; raufen, to pluck. The oc-currence of parallel forms beginning with r and scr or str respectively is very com-mon. G. reifen and streifen both signify to groove or channel, properly to stripe or streak. Riem, riemen, a thong, strap, tie ; strieme, a stripe or streak.
Ropy. Viscous, stringy.
Viscous bodies, as pitch, wax, birdlime, cheese toasted, will draw forth and roape.—Bacon in R.
Rosary. Rosarium or rosarius, sig-nifying properly a collection or garland of roses, was a title of many works (like E. garland, a common name for small collections of popular ballads—Hal.) con-sisting of compendiums of flowers as it were culled from preceding authors. Of these the most celebrated was that of Arnold de Villanova, entitled Liber quon-dam abbreviatus, verissimus thesaurus thesaurûm, Rosarius philosophorum et omnium secretorum maximum secretum, &c. It begins as follows : Iste liber no-minatur Compositor alias Rosarius eo quod ex libris philosophorum breviter abbreviatus est.—Carp.
In the course of time the name was specially appropriated to a string of Pater-nosters and Ave Marias to be recited in a certain order in honour of the fifteen mysteries of our Lord in which the Virgin was a partaker, and from the collection of prayers the name was transferred to the string of beads used for the purpose of keeping count in the recitation.
The Rosary, otherwise called Virgin's Psalter, is a new manner of praying—which is made up of 150 Ave Maries and 15 Paters tacked together with little buttons on a string.—Breviat in R. Rose.
Lat. rosa, Gr. ῥόδον.
Rosemary. Lat. rosmarinus, Fr. ros-marin, Sp. romero.
Roster. In military language the list of persons liable to a certain duty ; Bav. der roster. Wacht-roster, the list of those who are to take the watch. Probably from register, the common word for a list in G.—Schm.
Rostrum. Lat. rostrum, the bill of a bird, stem or beak of a ship ; the rostra in the Forum at Rome was a pulpit or speaking-stage adorned with the beaks of captured ships.
To Rot. ON. rotna, to decay, to fall off. Hárid rotnar, the hair falls off. At rota skinn, to strip the hair from skin. Du. rot, rotten, rottenness.
Rota. An arrangement of the members of a court to perform certain duties in turn. From Lat. rota, a wheel. The Rota at Rome is a high court of appeal which proceeds on this principle.
Rotate. Lat. rotare; rota, a wheel.
* Rote.—Routine.
I know and can by roate the tale that I would tell.—Surry in R.
Now it lies on you to speak to th' people Not by your own instruction, nor by th' matter Which your heart prompts you, but with such words That are but roated in your tongue.—Coriolanus.
Fr. route, a track or road, was formerly written rote, whence rotine, routine, an usual course, ordinary way ; par rotine, by rote.—Cot. Faire une chose par routine, only by habit without reflexion. Routiner, router, to make one learn by routine; routiner quelqu'un à coudre. Il est routini à ce travail, is thoroughly accustomed to it.—Gattel. See Route.
Rote.—Rut of the sea.
I hear the sea very strong and loud at the North, which is not unusual after violent atmo-ROUSE spheric agitations, when the wind has lulled. They call it the rote or rut of the sea.—D. Webster in Worcester.
ON. sioar-rót, roar of the sea. AS. hrutan, Sc. rout, to roar, to bellow.
Ane routand burn amydwart thereof rynnis Rumland and soundand on the craggy quhynnis, D.V.
Rouge. Fr. rouge. It. roggio, robbio, Sp. rubio, Prov. rog, from Lat. rubeus or robius.—Sch.
Rough. G. rauch, Du. ruych, ruygk.—Kil. AS. hruh, ruh, rug, ruw. Da. ru, rough, hairy. AS. hreoh. Da. raa, Sw. rå, stormy, fierce, cruel, seems a different word, though the two are sometimes confounded. Da. ru hugger, raa hugger, rough-hewer. G. das rauche heraus kehren, to turn the rough side outwards, fig. to show severity ; rauh, hoarse, rough, disagreeable to the feelings. Eine rauhe luft, a sharp raw air. Ein rauher mann, a rough, severe, inhuman, austere man. Rauh is also used for hairy.
Round. Lat. rotundus. It. rotondo, Sp. redondo, Prov. redon, OFr. reont, roont, Mod.Fr. rond, round. From rotare, to turn round. See Roll.
To Round or Rowne. To round one in the ear is to whisper. G. raunen, Du. roenen, ruenen, to whisper, to whisper in the ear.—Kil. Rouchi roun ! roun ! re-presents the noise made by a cat purring. Sp. runrun, rumour, report. Lap. rudn, fame, rumour, speech.
Roundel.—Roundelay. Fr. rondeau, rondelet de rime, a rime or sonnet that ends as it begins.—Cot. Of rondelet we have made roundelay, as if compounded with lay, a song.
Rouse. The radical sense of the word is shown in Pl.D. ruse, rusie, noise, racket, disturbance ; G. rauschen, to rustle, roar, to bustle, rush, do things with noise and bustle. Der bach rauscht; die wellen rauschen; der wind rauscht in den büschen. Gr. ῥοῖζος, any rushing sound, the whizzing of an arrow, flapping of wings, &c. The original sense is preserved in a rousing fire, a roaring or crackling fire ; a rousing lie, a cracker, a thundering lie. Fris. ruwzjen, to roar as the sea.—Epkema. In the same way G. rausch is a flare up, a sudden blaze. Einen rausch or rausch-chen in den ofen machen, to make a quick, clear, burning fire in the stove.—Küttn. The same word is metaphorically applied to excitation from drink. Sich einen rausch trinken, to have a flare up, a drinking bout, to be made tipsy. Im ersten rausch, in the first heat.—Stalder. Pl.D. ruusk, ON. russ, Du. roes, tipsiness. When transferred to the cognate sense of a full glass or bumper, E. rouse was not unnaturally supposed to be contracted from carouse (G. garaus), with which it has a merely accidental resemblance.
I have drunk since supper A rouse or two too much, and by G—. It warms my blood.—B. & F.
Rouse, noise, intemperate mirth.—Hal. From the noise accompanying impetuous action, G. rauschen, Sw. rusa, to rush, to move impetuously. Rusa opp, to rouse up, rise briskly up. Han rusade upp ur somnen, he roused up, started up out of sleep.
Æneas rousing as the foe came on, With force collected heaves a mighty stone. Pope's Homer.
More commonly however it is used as an active verb in the sense of exciting others to vigorous action.
Rout. To rout is to snore, to bellow as oxen ; N. rjota, ON. hriota, ryta, to mutter, grumble, grunt, snore. To rout about is then to move about uneasily, to make a disturbance. Prov. rota, tumult, confusion, rout. Mais dura la rota que fan en l'albergada ; longer lasts the rout or disturbance which they make in the lodging. Cuia eissir de la rota, he thinks to get out of the tumult.
From the noise, made by a crowd of people, OFr. route, G. rotte, E. rout, come to signify a gang, crowd, troop of people. ' The rabble rout.'
But nightingales a full great rout That flien over his head about.—R. R.
To rout together is to meet together in a rout, to consort.
On the same principle we have Lat. turba, tumult, confusion, uproar, then a crowd of persons, animals, things, a company of soldiers. Diez' explanation of rout in the sense of assemblage, from Lat. rupta, as a fraction or division, is quite unsatisfactory. It is however to this latter origin that we must refer It. rotta, a breach, rout, or overthrow of an army—Fl., Fr. route, a rout, discomfiture, the breaking of a troop or squadron of men.—Cot. On the other hand, Fr. deroute, of precisely the same signification, would seem to be from route, a troop. ' I parte a rowte or company of men asonder.—Je desroute.'—Palsgr.
Route.—* Rut. Fr. route (formerly rote), a rout, way, path, street, course, passage ; trace, tract or footing ; routes, the footing of ravenous beasts, as the wolf, boar, fox, &c.—Cot. Bret. rouden, a trace, line, vestige, mark ; Gael. rathad (ra'ad), a road, way ; Manx raad, a track, road, path ; raad cart, a cart way. Wall. rote, arote, trace, footsteps. — Grandg. A rut is the trace of the wheel. Banff rot, a line drawn on the soil as a guide in planting, &c., a row, a rut.
N. rad, rod, ro, a line, row.
To Rove.—Rover. Rover was formerly used in the special sense of a pirate or sea robber. Rovare, or thef of the sea, pirata.—Pr. Pm.
And over that the best men of the cytie by thyse ryotous persones were spoyled and robbid ; and by the rovers also of the sea.—Fabyan in R.
There is no doubt that in this use of the word it is a simple adoption of Du. roover, a robber, from rooven, to rob ; Dan. röverskip, a pirate ship. But as pirates are eminently a roving race, the verb to rove acquired from the coincidence the special sense of ranging the seas in search of plunder.
Four score of them departed with a barke and a pennesse—and so went to the islands of Hispaniola and Jamaica a roving.—Hackluyt in R.
Row. I. OE. rew, AS. ræwa, rawa, Pl.D. rege, rige, Du. rijge, rije, G. reihe, a line, rank, row, streak ; Pl.D. rige, It. ruga, Fr. rue, a row of houses or street.
It. riga, a line, streak, ruler ; Fr. raie, a ray, line, stroke, row ; raier, to rew, streak or score all over.—Cot. On the other hand the word seems related to ON. rod, N. rad, rod, ro, Sw. rad, Pol. rzad, a line, row, rank. Lat. radius, a rod, spoke of a wheel, beam, ray. Chaucer uses row of the rays of light.
The rowis red of Phebus' light.
See Ray.
2. Row is familiarly used in the sense of noise, disturbance, tumult. The imitative character of the word is shown by the term rowdydow, formed like rubadub to represent a continued noise. Swiss rauhen, rauwen, to make a dull, hollow, muttering sound ; rausen, to run noisily about, to revel ; rausi machen, to make a row, make merry in a loud and unrestrained manner ; rusen, ruussen, to roar, buzz, snore ; russen (rumoren), to make a row. Pl.D. rusc, noise, tumult, quarrel.
Swiss rüden, to bellow, to make a noise ; umerüden, to rove noisily about. NE. to row, to stir about.
To Row. 1. Du. roede, roeye, s. rod, a pole. Roede is also an oar, the pole with a flat blade by which a boat is propelled in rowing. Hence roeden or roeyen het schip, to row. Roeden or roeyen den wijn, to gauge a cask with a measuring rod. G. ruder, Du. roer, an oar.
2. To row, to dress cloth. Du. roud, rouw, rough, raw, unfinished; rouden, rouwen het laecken, to card or dress cloth, to dress rough cloth and raise the nap upon it. Rowed or unrowed cloth was what was sold as such after or before the nap had been raised respectively.
Sw. rugg, rough entangled hair; rugga, to raise the nap on cloth.

Rowdy. A noisy turbulent fellow, from rowdydow, an expression framed to represent continued noise.
Deuced handsome fellow that: a little too row-de-dow for my taste.—Aspen Court, i, p. 6.

Rowel. Fr. rouelle, dim. of roue, a wheel, any small hoop, circle, ring or round thing that is moveable in the place which it holds.— Cot. Venet. roda, a wheel; rodela, the rowel of a spur.
To Rowne. To whisper. See To Round.

Royal. Fr. royal, OFr. reial, real, Lat. regalis; from rex, a king.

Roynous.—Roynish. Fr. rogneux, roigneux, scabby, mangy, scurvy; rogne, roigne, Sp. roña, Bret. rouñ. It. rogna, the mange; Wall. rogn, ragn, itch, mange, also moss on a tree. Fin. rohna, scurf, rubbish.

To Rub. ON. rubba, to move a thing from its place, to rub; Sw. rubba, to put out of place, to disorder; Dan. rubbe, to rub, scrub, rough-hew. Lap. ruobbet, to rub, to scratch; aiweb ruobbet, to scratch the head. W. rhwbio, Gael. rub, to rub.
G. reiben, to grind or rub, seems the equivalent of Dan. rive, to grind, grate, tear, and not of rub.
From the meaning of the Scandinavian forms it would seem that the radical signification is to jog, to give an abrupt impulse, whence may be explained Pl.D. rubberig, Du. robbelig, rough, uneven, pimply. From the sense of jogging, that of moving abruptly to and fro, and of rubbing, would readily follow.
Sc. rug, to tug, and thence to rob, is a parallel form, and corresponding to rug and rub may be noted Du. rucken, rup-pen (Biglotton), to pluck, to rip, snatch away; G. rucken, to push, pull, remove, proceed; dem tische einen rück geben, to give the table a shove; rupfen, to pluck, to rob.

Rubbish.—Rubble. Rubbish or rub-ble, moilon, decombres.—Sherwood. Ro-bows or coldyr, petrosa, petro (Petrone sunt particulæ quæ abscinduntur de pe-tris.—Cath.)—Pr. Pm. Way cites a pay-ment from the Wardrobe account of A.D. 1480, ' for cariage away of a grete loode of robeux, that was left in the strete after the reparacyone made upon a hous ap-perteigning unto the same Wardrobe.' Robrisshe of stones, platras.—Palsgr.
These words have a similar origin, and are not to be explained as rubbage, or what comes away in the process of rub-bing. The radical image (as in rammel, rubbish, compared with Sw. ramla, to rattle, crash, fall down) is the rattling down of fragments from a ruinous struc-ture, and the origin of rubbish may be found in Fr. rabascher, to rumble, rattle'—Cot., while rubble (mortar and broken'stones of old buildings—Baret) may be explained from Du. rabbelen, G. rappeln,'to rattle; Fr. rabalter, to rumble, rattle. Pl.D. rabakken, to rattle; een old rabak, a rattle-trap, old ruinous piece of goods.

Rubicund. — Rubric. — Ruby. Lat. ruber, rubicundus, red; rubrica, a red pigment.

Ruck. A disorderly mass, a crease or fold in linen, ' Your gown sits all o' rucks.' To ruckle, to rumple or work up into wrinkles. ' The bandage ruckles up, so it must all come off.'—Mrs Baker.
ON. hrucka, to wrinkle; N. rukka, a crease, a wrinkle. The course of deriva-tion seems to be the same as we have had occasion to observe in so many other instances, from a tremulous or broken sound, to a tremulous or abrupt move-ment, then to a wavy or broken, uneven surface.
Representing broken sound may be cited Sw. rockla, N. rukla, G. röcheln, to rattle in the throat; Du. ruchelen, to bray like an ass, cough, grunt, mutter; E. dial. ruggle, a child's rattle; to rucket, to rattle. Then, in the sense of abrupt or broken movement; N. rugla, to waggle, shake, rock; E. dial. roggle, to shake; ruggle, to stir about; ruckle, a struggle; Pl.D. ruckeln, rucken, to jog—Danneil; N. rugga, to rock, shake, vacillate; Sc. rug, to tug. Roggyn or mevyn, agito.—Pr. Pm.
Finally from the idea of a jogging or a jolting movement to that of a rough uneven surface is an easy step. The com-plete transition from sound to shape is exemplified in N. hurkla, to rattle in the throat; glamra, skrangla, to rumble, rattle; hurklet, glamren, skranglen, rug-ged, uneven. In like manner we pass from Dan. skrukke, to cluck as a hen, to N. skrukka, a wrinkle, an unevenness; skrukkjen, hard, uneven, wrinkled.

The same connection between the image of a confused noise and a rumpled structure is seen in Dan. tummel, uproar, racket, and E. tumbling of a garment.
To Ruck. To squat or cower down.
After a most comely sort she rucketh down upon the ground, not much unlike the sitting of our gentlewomen ofttimes here in England.—Fardle of Fashion, A.D. 1555.
But now they rucken in their nests And resten.—Gower in Mrs Baker.
A brooding hen is provincially called a rucking hen, probably from her importunate clucking at that time. Gael. ròc, to croak. Dan. skrukke, to cluck ; skrukhone, a brooding hen. To ruck then is properly, as It. chioccare, chiocciare, to cluck as a brooding hen, also to cower or squat down as a hen over her chickens.—Fl.—Dan. ruge, to brood, to hatch.
The same transposition of the r that is found in N. rukla, hurkla, to rattle in the throat, connects E. ruck with Pl.D. hurken, daal hurken, to squat down ; hurkepott, a pot of embers over which women crouch to keep themselves warm. E. dial. to hurkle, to shrug up the back ; to hurch, to cuddle.—Hal.

Rudder. 1. G. ruder, an oar ; steuerruder, the steer-oar or rudder, vessels having originally been steered by an oar working at the stern. See To Row.
2. A sieve for separating corn from chaff.—B.—G. reiter, rader, Du. rede, reder, a sieve.—Kil. See Riddle.

Ruddy. Of a red colour. Pl.D. rood, W. rhudd, AS. read, red ; AS. rudu, redness ; OE. rode, complexion, the red colour of the face, and thence ruddy, full coloured. Gr. ῥόδον, the rose, is doubtless the same word ; Lat. rutilus, red.

Rude. Lat. rudis unwrought, untaught.

Rudiment. Lat. rudimentum, the first teaching, a principle or beginning.

To Rue.—Ruth. AS. hreowan, reowan, to rue, be sorry for, grieve, lament. G. reue, OHG. hriuwa, mourning, lamentation ; ON. hryggr, sorrowful ; hrygð, E. ruth, pitifulness, sorrow.

Ruff.—Ruffle. Another instance of the kind mentioned under Ruck, where from a root representing in the first instance a tremulous or vibratory sound are developed forms signifying motion of like character, then a waving, uneven, irregular surface.
In the original sense, E. ruffle, a vibrating sound made upon a drum less loud than the roll.—Stocqueler in Worcester.
When James Robertson offered to speak upon the scaffold he was interrupted by the ruffle of the drum.—Wodrow.
Sc. ruff, the roll of the drum, beating with the feet in token of applause.—Jam.
Ptg. rufa, rufla, a roll on the drum. Fr. ronfler, Lang. ronflar, Grisons' grunflar, grufflar, to snore ; E. gruffle, to growl.
That ruffeln was used in the sense of shivering or trembling is shown by the glossaries cited in Dief. Supp. Frigutire, zittern vor frost, von kälte ruffen : van kelden roeffen : schaderende of bevende kald lijden. To ruffle is then to throw a surface into elevations, to disturb, disorder, whether in a physical or figurative sense. A breeze ruffles or curls the surface of the water ; anger ruffles or disturbs the mind. To ruffle silk is to tumble or rumple it. A ruff is a plaited collar ; ruffles, plaited borders for the wrist or in other parts of dress. Du. ruyffelen, to rumple, wrinkle. Ptg. arrufarse, to snarl as a dog, to set up his feathers as a turkey-cock, to curl as the surface of water, to become angry. Cat. arrufar, to wrinkle, crumple ; arrufarse, to bristle, to set up the hairs or feathers ; arrufar las nas, to turn up the nose, to show displeasure. Castrais rufa, to wrinkle, crumple, crease ; Lang. rufa, a wrinkle, crease, rumple ; rufe, rough, rugged.

Ruffian.—Ruffler. To ruffle is to do anything with noise and disturbance, to bustle, to swagger.
The night comes on, and the high winds Do sorely ruffle.—Shakesp.
The rising winds a ruffling gale afford.—Dryden.
Fr. ronfler, Bret. rufla, to snort, snore, snift. Hence ruffler, a bully. So Ptg. roncar, to rumble, roar, snore, also to hector ; roncador, a snorer, a fierce bully, a noisy fellow. Rufista, a quarreler.
From the same origin is It. ruffiano, Sp. rufian, E. ruffian, properly a swaggerer, swasher, a bully, then the companion of a prostitute, and in It. a pimp or pander.
Sp. arrufianado, quarrelsome, swaggering, insolent.

Rufous. Lat. rufus, reddish.

Rugged.—Rug. A rugged surface is one broken up into sharp projections, the idea of abrupt irregularities of surface being expressed by the figure of sharp abrupt movements, as in the case of shagged, shaggy, from shog, or jagged, from jog. Roggyn or mevyne, agito.—Pr. Pm. Roggle, to shake.—Brockett. Sc. rug, to tug, to snatch. N. rugga, to rock, shog, jog. Sw. rugga sig, se hårisser, to stand on end ; ruggig, raggig, rugged, rough, shaggy; rugg, shaggy hair; rugga kläde, to raise the nap on cloth. Water-rugs mentioned in Macbeth are shaggy water-dogs. A rug is a shaggy garment. See Ruck, Rag.
Ruin. Lat. ruina; ruo, to fall head-long.
Rule. Lat. regula, Prov. regla, Fr. règle, OE. rewele, reule.
Rum. Rome or rum, in the cant of rogues and thieves, signified great, good. Romevyle (rumville), London ; rome mort (mort, woman), the Queen (Elizabeth) ; rome bouse (bouse, drink), wine.—Har-man, A.D. 1566.
Rum, like the opposite term queer, properly signifying bad, is used in the secondary sense of odd, curious, out of the way, in a contemptible sense.
' A rummy old fellow,' or ' a queer old fellow.'—Modern Slang.
From rum-booze, good drink, strong drink, wine, brandy, the name of rum has been appropriated to the spirits distilled from the produce of the sugar-cane.
Rumbooze, wine or other good liquor.—Grose.
Rumb. The angle which a ship makes in her sailing with the meridian of the place where she is ; one point of the mariner's compass, or eleven degrees and a quarter.—B.
It. rombo, Ptg. rumbo, rumo. The points of the compass were in old charts marked by large lozenges or rhombs, whence the name of rhumb is said to be given to the points of the com-pass. Fr. rumb, a roombe, or point of the compass, a line drawn directly from wind to wind in a compass, traversboard, or sea-card.—Cot.
But it is not unlikely that the word may have been introduced with the compass itself, which is sup-posed to have come through the Arabians. Now Arab, rub" is quarter; rub"-ù-takhta (takhta, board), a wooden quadrant for taking altitudes, a graduated board.
To Rumble. Du. rommelen, to rum-ble, buzz ; rommeling, lumber, old fur-niture ; rammelen, to clink, rattle, tattle ; rammeling, clash. G. rummeln, to rum-ble ; rummel, gerümpel, rümmeley, lum-ber ; rumpeln, to rumble, rattle, clatter.
E. dial, rommle, to speak low or secretly ; rommock, to romp boisterously; ram-making, behaving riotously and wantonly; rumbullion, a great tumult ; rumbustical, boisterous ; rummage, lumber, rubbish ; rumpus, a noise, uproar ; It. rombare, rombazzare, rombeggiare, to make a rum-bling or clattering noise ; rombolare, to rumble, roar, clash, clatter.
Rumbustical. Boisterous.—Hal. Fr. rabaster, to make a clatter or disturbance.—Cot. Lang. rabastaire, rambaliaire (tracassier), a busybody ; Castrais rabas-traire, rabastejha, to trouble, importune.
Ruminate. Lat. rumen, the paunch, belly, the cud of beasts ; rumino, to chew the cud.
Rummage. Two words seem con-founded. I. Rummage, the proper stow-ing of merchandise in a ship ; rummager, the person appointed to look to that duty; from Du. ruim, Fr. rum, the hold of a ship.
The master must provide a perfect mariner call-ed a romager, to raunge and bestow all merchan-dise in such place as is convenient.—Hackluyt in R.
And that the masters of the ships do look well to the romaging, for they might bring away a great deale more than they do if they would take paine in the romaging.—Ibid.
Hence to rummage, to search thoroughly among the things stowed in a given re-ceptacle.
2. But in addition to the foregoing the word is sometimes used in the sense of racket, disturbance.
And this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch, and the chief head Of this post haste and romage in the land. Hamlet.
In this sense it may be a parallel form with rumpus; It. rombazzo, rombeggio, a rumbling noise; rammoscio, disturbance (shown in rammoscinare, to rumple, ruffle —Torriano), or with Sc. rummes, rum-myss, to bellow, roar; rammis, to rage about, and perhaps with Fr. ramage, the song of birds, chatter of children. Under the same head must be classed E. dial. rummage, lumber, rubbish, probably from the rattling, shaky condition of old things. G. rummel, rumble, lumber, old things ; rumpeln, to rumble, rattle ; rumpelkasten, a chest for lumber, figuratively, an old coach, exactly corresponding to E. rattle-trap ; gerümpel, lumber. Pl.D. rabakken, to rattle ; een old rabak, an old piece of furniture.
Rummer. Sw. remmer, Du. roomer, G. römer, a large drinking glass.
Rumour. Lat. rumor, a rumbling sound, a report.
Rump. G. rumpf, Du. rompe, trunk, body separate from the extremities. Sw. rumpa, the tail, rump. We are led from analogous forms to suppose that the pri-mitive meaning is projection, then stump, tail, tail-part or rump. Thus we have G. sturz, shock, plunge, something projecting, stump, dock of a horse's tail; sturz am pflug, plough-tail. Bav. starz, cab-bage stalk, tail of a beast. Again from stutzen, to start, push, knock against; stutz, shock, push, anything short ; stutz-schwanz, bobtail.
The sense of projection would naturally spring from Pl.D. rumpeln, rumpumpeln, to jolt, jog.

Rumple. G. rummeln, rumpeln, to rumble, rattle. Pl.D. rummeln, rumpeln, both in the first instance identical with E. rumble, are generally appropriated, the one to the original sense, the other to the derived one of jogging, jolting. De wage rumpelt up dem steen wege : the carriage rattles or jolts along the road. Rum-pumpeln, to jolt greatly.

Then, as in so many other cases, we pass from the notion of broken sound or shaking motion to that of disturbance, confusion, a disordered, tumbled struc-ture. Bav. rummel, a disturbance, uproar: der Bayrische rummel, the war of suc-cession in 1778. To rumple clothes is to disorder by rough usage. Du. rompelen, rimpelen, rompen, to wrinkle.—Kil. Rom-pelig, rough, uneven.

In like manner rammel, rattle, clatter ; G. rammeln, to rout about, make a dis-turbance, move noisily to and fro. Das kind rammelt sich im bett herum, das bett zu schande verrammelt, the child tumbles about in bed, tumbles the bed shamefully. ON. raung, rong, rib of a boat.

Rumpus. A disturbance. Rumbus-tious, rumbustical, boisterous, noisy. Sc. rummyss, to bellow, roar ; It. rombazzo, a clatter ; Swiss rumpusen, to pull one another about, to contend in sport. ON. rumr, rymr, clash, noise.

Run. AS. rinnan, and transposed, yrnan; Du. rennen, to run. ON. renna (rann, runnit), Dan. rinde, to flow, to melt, to run, to fly ; ON. renna, rensl, Dan. rende, a canal, a runnel. ON. renna (rendi, rent), to pour out, liquefy, to cause to run ; renna kopar, to smelt copper. Linc. to rind or render, to melt as lard, &c.—Hal.

Runagate. A refugee or runaway, from OE. gate, way.
Whom they coulde not overcome by battell, they overcame with fear of beating, and made them run away, not like enemies overcome by battell, but like runnagate slaves.—Golding, Jus-tine in R.
The word is then confounded with Fr. renégat. It. rinnegato, one who renounces his religion, from rinnegare, to renounce, deny. In Sp. renegador is commonly used in the original sense of an apostate, while renegado is taken in the secondary sense of a reprobate, a wicked abandoned person.
He letteth the runagates continue in scarcity.

Rundlet.—Runlet. A small cask, a further dim. of OFr. rondelle, s. s.—Roquef.

Rung. A staff, a step of a ladder. Goth. rugga, a staff, rod. Gael. rang, rongas, a staff, bludgeon, rib of a boat, any piece of wood by which others are joined. ON. raung, rong, rib of a boat.

Runnet.—Rennet. The maw of a calf, used to make milk run or curdle for cheese.
As nourishing milk when runnet is put in Runnes, all in heapes of tough thicke curd, though in his nature thinne.—Chapman, Homer in R.
G. rennen, to run ; rennse, rennet ; Du. rennen, rinnen, rinnen, to run, to coagu-late ; runsel, rensel, rennet.—Kil.

Runt. Sc. runt, trunk of a tree ; kail runt, a cabbage-stalk. E. dial. runt, stump of underwood, dead stump of a tree, the rump. From the sense of a stump or dead stock the term is figura-tively applied to a withered hag, an old woman, or to poor lean cattle. The primitive sense is probably a projection, as in the case of rump. Sw. runka, to jog, shake, vacillate.
The occurrence of parallel forms with an initial r and str or scr is very common, as rub and scrub; G. rumpf and strumpf, trunk, stock. In like manner, corre-sponding to runt, we have E. dial. strunt, a bird's tail; strunty, docked, short.

-rupt. -ruption. — Rupture. Lat. ruptus, broken, burst, ruptio, a bursting, breaking, from rumpo, ruptum. As in Corrupt, Disruption, &c.

Rural.—Rusticate. Lat. rus, ruris, the country, whence ruralis, and rusticari, to dwell in the country.

Rush. AS. risc, Pl.D. rusk, aurusk, risch. Probably from the whispering sound when moved by the wind. AS. hriscian, to make a rustling noise, to shake, vibrate, frizzle.—Bosw. Sw. ruska, ruskla, to rustle, to shake. To shake as a rush is a proverbial expression. He bevef as een aurusk.—Brem. Wtb. See Reed.

To Rush. G. rauschen, to rustle, purl as a brook, whisper as the wind in the bushes, roar as the waves, to make a noise or bustle, to rush, to move swiftly with a noise or bustle.—Küttn. Du. ruysschen, bombilare, strepere, fremere, susurrare et impetum facere, irruere, grassari.—Kil. N. rusk, noise, rattle, uproar, sudden movement; rough weather; ruska, to rattle, throw into disorder, do things with bustle and haste.
Russet. Fr. roux, It. rosso, Lat. rus-sus, red.
Rust. G. rost; Du. roest.
To Rustle. AS. hristlan, Pl.D. russeln, krusseln, ruscheln, G. rasseln. Pl.D. De muus russelt im stro; G. die maus rasselt im stroh. Sw. ruskla, to move with a slight noise, to rustle in moving. Directly imitative.
Rut. I. The trace of a wheel. See Route.
2. Fr. ruit, rut, the rut of deers or boars, their lust, and the season when they engender; also a herd of female deer followed by the male in that season.

—Cot. In Bret, the term rud or rut is applied also to domestic animals, as dogs; ruda, to be on heat.
From the violent behaviour of the ani-mal under sexual excitation. See Ram-ble, Rout. G. ranzen, to make disorderly motions united with a loud noise, to rout about, is applied to hogs and all four-footed beasts of prey when they go to rut or to couple. Rauschen, properly to roar or rustle, is also applied to hogs and especially sows on heat. Swiss rüden, to make a noise, to bellow; umerüöden, to riot about; der rüedi, rüedibub (wild-fang), an inconsiderate and petulant young man. In a special sense rüden is to rut, to be on heat; rüd, rüedi, a Tom cat. Sp. ruido, noise, uproar, tumult.
Rye. ON. rugr, Du. rogge, G. rocken, roggen, Lith. ruggei, Russ. rozhj.

Sabbath. A Hebrew word signifying rest.
Sable. It. zibellino, G. zobel, Pol. sobol, ON. safali or savali. Jornandes calls the fur pelles saphirinæ.
Sabre. G. sabel, Ital. sciablo, Pol. szabla, Magy. szablya, a sword, from szabni, to cut.
Saccharine. Lat. saccharum, Gr. σάκχαρ, σάκχαρον, sugar.
Sacrament.—Sacerdotal.—Sacred.—Sacrifice.—Sacrist. Lat. sacer, sacred, whence sacerdos, a priest; sacrificium, the holy rite of offering a victim; sacramentum, a solemn or sacred oath; sacrista, a keeper of holy things, &c.
Sack. I. A word common to a wide range of languages, Heb., Arab., Gr., Lat., G., &c. Sp. saquear, Fr. saccager, to sack a town, is from the use of a sack in re-moving plunder. Du. sacken, to sack, put up in sacks, thence to rob, to plunder. Sacken ende packen, convasare omnia, furto omnia colligere. Sackman, a plun-derer, robber.—Kil. In the same way we speak of bagging game for bringing it to bag.
To give the sack is a very general ex-pression for dismissing one from his em-ployment, equivalent to packing him off, sending him off bag and baggage. Fr. On lui a donné son sac et ses quilles (said of a servant whom his master hath put away), he hath his passport given him.—Cot. Den sack sijnen knecht geven, to dismiss his servant ignominiously.—Kil.
2. Sack (wine), vin d'Espagne, vin sec.—Sherwood, 1650. Bishop Percy cites from an old account-book of the city of Worcester, 'Anno Eliz. 34. Item for a gallon of claret wine, and seck, and a pound of sugar.' The name was properly given to the dry Spanish wine such as that still imported under the name of sherry. 'Sherry sack, so called from Xeres, a sea town of Corduba in Spain, where that kind of sack is made.'—Blount, Glossographia in Nares. Shake-speare uses sherris and sack as synonymous.
'This valour comes of sherris, so that skill in the weapon is nothing without sack.—H. IV.
Minsheu (1625) explains sacke, a wine that cometh out of Spaine, Belgicé Roomenije [Roomenije, vinum Hispaniense—Kil.], wijn seck, quasi siccum, propter magnam siccandi humores facultatem, giving the right derivation of the word though he did not understand the meaning of the term dry applied to wine; When the proper meaning of the name was so early lost in England, it is not surprising that it should have been applied to other strong white wines coming from the same quarter, whether sweet or dry, and we hear of Canary and Malaga sacks. Venner (Via recta ad vitam longam)

1637 in N.), after discussing medicinally the propriety of mixing sugar with sack, adds : ' But what I have spoken of mixing sugar with sack must be understood of Sheric sack, for to mix sugar with other wines, that in a common appellation are called sack, and are sweeter in taste, makes it unpleasant to the palate and fulsome to the stomach.' ' Canarie wine, which beareth the name of the islands from whence it is brought, is of some termed a sacke with this adjunct, sweet.'

Kilian's sack-wijn, vinum percolatum, vulgo saccatum, was a totally different thing, being a wash of the lees of wine and water strained through a bag. 'Saccatum, buffet, c'est beuvraige de lie de vin et d'eau coulée parmy un sac.'—Catholicum parvum in Duc.

Sacrilege. Lat. sacrilegium, a stealing of sacred things ; lego, lectum, to pick, to gather.

Sad. The radical meaning is at rest, steadfast, fixed, serious, sorrowful.

Though I be absent in bodi, by spyryt I am with you joiynge and seynge your ordre and the sadnesse [in common version steadfastness] of your bileve that is in Christ.—Wiclif, Coloss. c. 2, in R.

But we saddere [firmiores] men owen to sustejne the feblenesses of sike men and not plese to ussilf.—Id. Romans, c. 15.

W. sad, firm, wise, sober, discreet ; merch sad, a discreet woman. Pl.D. sade, rest, stillness, quiet, from setten, to set, to fix. Sik to sade geven, to be at rest ; saden, sadigen, Lat. sedare, to quiet, to bring to rest. ON. settr, Dan. sat, sedate, steady, staid. Swab. satt, fast, firm, close. Das eisen liegt satt an. Satt binden, to bind fast.

Saddle. Du. sadel, G. sattel, Bohem. sedlo. Lat. sella is a contracted form of the same word, signifying a seat or contrivance for sitting on a horse. Bohem. sedeti, to sit ; sedadlo, Lat. sedile, a seat. Pol. siodlo, saddle ; siedlisko, seat. The word is very likely to have been formed among the equestrian Sarmatians.

Safe.—Save.—Salvation.—Salvage. Lat. salvus, in good health, whole, sound, well ; Fr. sauf, safe. Lat. salvo, Fr. sauver, to save, and thence salvage, the saving of goods from wreck or fire.

To Sag. To sink gradually down, to be depressed ; properly to sink as the surface of water leaking away or sucked up through the cracks of the vessel in which it is contained. Sc. seg, seyg, to sink as liquids in a cask in consequence of absorption. The roof of a house is seggit when it has sunk a little inwards.—Jam. Gael. sug, suck, imbibe ; sugh, drain, dry up, drink up. Swiss suggen, to suck ; siiggern, siickern, G. sickern, to drain away, trickle, ooze. AS. sigan, pret. sah, to suck in, to sink down, to set. ' Swa swa sigende sond thonne ren swylgth :' as thirsty sand swallows the rain. G. saugen, pret. sog, to suck, to absorb moisture ; sogen, to drop, trickle down, to sink, settle. Sw. suga, to suck, to soak ; suga i sig, to absorb, imbibe ; suga or siga sig igenom, to soak through, to drip ; signa, to sink, fall gradually. N. siga, to ooze, as water through the earth, to fall gradually by its own weight, become gradually lower, sink. ON. at lata siga undan, to give way. Byrðin sigr at, the load weighs heavy on the horse, sags on him. Bav. ersaigen, to make the surface of water sink, to dry up, exhaust, waste ; seigen, to sink. 'Die prawt swaig und saig nider in amacht :' the bride was silent and sank down fainting. Du. seyghen, sijghen, G. seigen, seihen, to strain liquids, to cause them to sag or sink down through a strainer. Seiger, an hour-glass, marking time by the sinking of sand. Bav. seig, G. seicht, shallow, having sunk down or drained away. Lith. nuseku, nusenku, I flow away, dry up, sink ; sunkus, heavy. N. sakka, Pl.D. sakken, to sink down. Dat water is in't sakken, the water is falling. De mudder, de barm is sakket, the sediment is fallen or settled. Af sakken, hen under sakken (as Fr. sier en arrière), to fall with the stream.

Sagacious, -sage. Lat. sagax, quick of apprehension, or of sight or scent or taste ; sagio, to smell out, to perceive quickly, to guess at or foresee. Præsagio, to presage or have scent of beforehand. Probably a modification of sapio, to savour, smell, taste or smack, to understand and perceive well, to be wise.

Sage. I. Fr. sage, OFr. saive. It. savio, saggio, from Lat. sapius, preserved in nesapius, imprudent, silly.—Petronius. Sapio, to taste, thence to discriminate, to be wise. See Sagacious.

2. Fr. saulge, Lat. salvia, the aromatic plant.

Sail. G. segel, ON. segl, sail ; sigla, to sail ; w. siglo, to shake, rock, move, or stir.

Saint.—Sanctify.—Sanctimonious. Lat. sanctus, devoted or dedicated, thence holy, a saint ; sanctimonia, holiness. See Sanction.

Sake. AS. sacu, contention, dispute, suit at law. Wearþ sacu betweox Abrahames hyrdemannum and Lothes.—Gen. xiii. 7. Forsecgan, Ætsacan, andsacan, withersacan, to gainsay, deny, forsake. Goth, sakan, to object, reprove, contend with; andsakan, to oppose; gasakan, to accuse; sakjo, contest. Pl.D. sake, suit at law, cause of a thing; saken, to complain, to bring an action; versâken, to deny. G. sache, a complaint, process, suit at law, an affair, business, occurrence, thing.

Salad. Fr. salade, It. insalata, properly a dish seasoned with salt.

Salary. Lat. salarium, a soldier's pay, properly an allowance of salt.

Sale. See To Sell.

Salient. Lat. salio, to leap.

Sallow. 1. AS. salig, salh, Gael, seileach, Lat. salix, W. helyg, Fin. salawa, a willow. 2. AS. salowig, dark in colour. Bav. sal, discoloured, dark, dirty. 'Der spiegel glitz was worden sal:' the polish of the mirror was become dull. Goth, bisauljan, Fr. salir, to dirty. Gael, sal, dross, scum, filth; salaich, to sully; W. halawg, defiled; halogi, to defile. Most words signifying to dirty have their origin in the figure of dabbling in the wet, as shown under Salve, Soil, Sully. Under the latter head are indicated a parallel series, Fr. souiller, Pl.D. solgen, sölen, Flem. solowen, seulewen, &c., to dirty, which it is difficult clearly to distinguish from those in the present article.

Sally. Fr. saillie, a breaking out upon, a leap, spring; saillir, to leap, go out, stand out beyond others. Bret, sala, Lat. salire, to leap.

Saloon. Fr. salon, a large hall; salle. It. sala, a hall; OHG. sal, ON. salr, AS. salo, house, palace, hall. Goth, saljan, to lodge, to dwell; salithvos, lodgings.

Salt.—Saline. Lat. sal, Gael, salann, salt; sal, salt water, the sea; Gr. ἅλς, salt, the sea; W. halen, salt; hallt, salted. The word is common also to the whole Finnish family. Fin. suola, Wogul sal, Magy. só.

Saltier. Fr. saultoir, properly a stirrup, from sauter, to mount, but in Heraldry applied to signify St Andrew's Cross.

Salubrious.—Salute. Lat. salvus, whole, sound, in good health; saluber, -bris, healthbearing, wholesome; salus, -utis, health. Corresponding forms with an initial h corresponding to the Lat. s (as in W. halen, Lat. sal; W. hen, Lat. senex) are Gr. ὅλος, whole, sound; Goth. hails, hale, whole; G. heil, health; E. heal, holy, &c. Compare the Lat. salutation Salve! with E. Hail!

Salve. Goth, salbon, G. salven, to anoint; Pl.D. salven, to smear, to mess. 'Mit dem eten up'n teller herum salven,' to make a mess on one's plate in eating. 'Wo hest du di so to salvet?' how have you so dirtied yourself, made such a mess of yourself. 'Sien tüg besalven,' to daub or dirty one's clothes. Bav. salben, a mishmash. Henneberg besabbeln (of children), Coblenz besäbeln, Palat. besalben, to daub oneself; Osnabr. besabben, to beslobber. The word is probably, like smear and others signifying grease, formed from the image of dabbling in the wet, dirtying, then daubing with grease as the most permanent kind of dirtying. It would thus be of a common origin with E. sallow, Fr. sale, and the parallel forms sully, soil, &c. Traces of the original sense of dabbling in the wet are to be found in Bav. gesalb, gesalf, gesalfer, chatter, tattle, a sense constantly expressed by terms taken from the agitation of water; salfern, to spatter; sülfern, to sip. Swiss sulpern, to blot, to dabble. Bav. salber, one who works slow, on the same principle on which we give the name of a dabbler to an inefficient workman.

Salver. Sp. salva, salvilla, a salver, or piece of plate on which glasses, &c., are served at table. As salva was the tasting of meat at a great man's table, salvar, to guarantee, to taste or make the essay of meat served at table, the name of salver is in all probability from the article having originally been used in connection with the essay. The Italian name of the essay was credenza, and the same term was used for a cupboard or sideboard; credentiere, credenzere, a prince's taster, cup-bearer, butler, or cupboard-keeper.—Fl. Fr. credenzed'argent, silver plate, or a cupboard of silver plate.—Cot.

Same. Goth, sama, same; Slav. sam, Russ. samii, self; Pol. sam, alone, by himself, mere, same, self. Sanscr. sama, like, equal, plane, all, whole. Fin. sama, same, in what is called the adessitive case, becomes samalla, which is used elliptically in the sense of 'at the same time,' agreeing in a remarkable manner with Lat. simul, and offering a far from singular instance in which an explanation of Greek or Latin forms may be found in the Finnish languages.

malla muodolla, in the same mode or manner. Samphire. Fr. Herbe de Saint Pierre, a sea-side plant.

Sample.—Sampler. From Lat. exemplum, OSp. enxemplo, Ptg. enxemplar, exemplar, a model. The same insertion of an n is seen in Ptg. enxame, a swarm of bees, from Lat. examen.

Sanction. Lat. sancio, sancitum and sanctum, to ordain, appoint, establish, ratify, thence to consecrate, dedicate; sanctus, ordained, sacred, inviolable, holy; sanctio, an ordinance, ratification.

Sane.—Sanity.—Sanatory. Lat. sanus, whole, sound; sano, -as, to make sound, to heal. Insanus, unsound of mind, insane. See Sound.

Sand. ON. sandr, G. sand.

Sandal. Gr. σάνδαλον, Lat. sandalium.

Sanguine.—Sanguinary, -sanguin-. Lat. sanguis, -inis, blood. Consanguinity, community of blood.

Sap. Pl.D. sapp, juice, wet. 'He paddjet in den drekk dat em de sapp um de oren flugt:' he paddles in the dirt so that he is splashed over head and ears. G. saft, juice. The word seems radically the same with sop, from the noise of dabbling. Pl.D. sappen, to sound as wet in motion, to drip, leak, ooze. De schoe sappet, the water sounds in one's shoe. Idt is so vuul up'r straten dat it sappet: it is so dirty in the streets that one hears it splash, it is sopping wet. Een sappigen weg, a soppy or muddy way. De appel sappet dor den sakk: the apple-juice soaks through the sack. Bav. safferen, to squash or sound under the feet like wet ground, or shoes full of water; OHG. saf, G. saft, juice.

To Sap. Fr. sapper, to undermine, to dig into; It. zappare, to dig; zappa, a mattock, spade, shovel; Wal. sapá, to dig. . . Essentially the same word as step, from the stamping action of the foot in digging, on the same principle on which Bohem. kopati is to kick, and also to hack or hoe, to dig. Venet. zapar, to tread, paw as a horse, stamp; It. zappegare, to trample.

Sap-green. G. saft-färbe, among painters, colours made of the juices of the animal or vegetable kingdom as opposed to minerals. Saft-grün, sap-green, made of the juice of buckthorn-berries.

Sapient. Lat. sapio, to be wise. See Sagacious.

Saponaceous. Lat. sapo, Gr. σάπων, soap.

Saracen. Gr. Σαρακηνός. Commonly explained from Arab. shark, rising, the East; sharki, Eastern. The difficulty is that the Moslems would not have appeared to themselves in the character of Easterns, but only to the Western enemies whom they were attacking. In fact the name of Saracens seems to have been unknown to the Arabs themselves, and only to have been in use among the Greeks, who never would have devised a name with an Arabic explanation.

Sarcasm.—Sarcastic. Gr. σάρξ, -κός, σαρκάζω, to tear flesh like dogs, to sneer (in mod.Gr. to bite, to deride); σαρκασμός, a bitter laugh, sneer.

To Sarce.—Searce. Fr. sasser, to sift through a fine sieve; sas (OFr. séas, Lang. sedas), a ranging sieve or searce.—Cot. It. setaccio, setazzo, a sieve or strainer made of horse-hair; Lat. seta, a bristle, horse-hair.

Sarcenet. It. saracinetto, q. d. Saracen's silk.—B. Pannus Saracenici operis.—Duc.

Sarcophagous. Gr. σαρκοφάγος; σάρξ, flesh, and φαγεῖν, to eat.

Sardonic. Gr. Σαρδώνιος, Σαρδόνιος. γέλως Σαρδόνιος, a bitter, feigned laughter; from a herb growing in Sardinia, which, if eaten, caused great laughing, but ended in death.

Sash. 1. It. sessa, a Persian turban [a piece of muslin wrapped round the cap]—Fl. 2. Fr. châssis, the sliding frame of a window; châsse, framework in which certain things are held, a shrine for relics. La châsse d'un rasoir, the handle of a razor; d'une rose, the calix. See To Chase.

Sassafras. A medical wood. Fr. sassafras, Sp. saxafrax, salsafrax, saxifrage, because the same virtue was attributed to sassafras as to saxifrage, of breaking up the stone in the bladder.

Satchel. Du. sackel, G. säckel, a purse. Fr. sachet, a little sack.

To Sate.—Satiate.—Satiety.—Satisfaction. Lat. sat, satis, enough.

Satellite. Lat. satelles, a personal attendant.

Satin. Ptg. setim. Said to be a Chinese word.—N. and Q.

Satire. Lat. satira, satyra, a poem in which the manners of the times were freely treated without respect of persons. Gr. σάτυρος, a play in which the chorus consisted of Satyrs.

Satrap. Gr. σατράπης, originally Persian.

Saturate. Lat. satur, full fed, sated.
Saturnalia. Lat. saturnalia, feast of Saturn, in which unrestrained licence was allowed, even to slaves.
Saturnine. A grave unsocial disposition ascribed to the influence of the planet Saturn, as a Jovial disposition expresses the tendency to good fellowship induced by the planet Jupiter.
Satyr. Lat. Satyrus, Gr. Σάτυρος.
Sauce.—Saucer. It. salsa, Fr. sauce, properly a mixture of salt, then any relishing addition to food. Saucer, a little dish to hold sauce.
Saucy. As sauce is a sharp-tasted seasoning of food, it is metaphorically applied to sharp speech, short sharp replies. Fr. sauce, met. a reprimand. A man is said to be bien saucé when he has received a sharp reprimand.
Wo was his coke but if his sauce were Poinant and sharp, and ready all his gere.
Chaucer, Prol.
If it be so, as fast As she answers thee with frowning looks, I'll sauce her with bitter words.—As You Like It.
To Saunter. One of those cases in which either an l after the initial s has been lost, or parallel forms beginning with s and sl respectively have originally been developed, as in Lat. sorbere and G. schlürfen, E. sop and slop, Pl.D. sabbeln, säbbern, and E. slobber.
In like correspondence with saunter we have G. schlentern, Sw. släntra, to wander idly about; G. schlendern, to saunter, loiter—Flügel; Pl.D. slender-weg, a promenade.
The radical meaning would seem to be to trail or drag along. G. Schlender, a gown with a train; Pl.D. slender, the usual course. E. dial. slade to drag; Sw. slade, E. sled, a sledge or drag. Sw. slinta, Pl.D. slindern, to slide; Da. slunte, to idle.
Sausage. It. salsiccia, Fr. saucisse, from being cured with salt.
Savage. Fr. sauvage. It. selvatico, selvaggio, salvaggio (Lat. sylvaticus), savage, wild, untamed, forest-bred.—Fl.
To Save. See Safe.
Saveloy. Fr. cervelas, a kind of dry sausage eaten cold.—Cot. It. cervellata, a kind of yellow sausage in use in the Milanese. Doubtless from being made of (Fr. cervelle) brains.
Savour. Fr. saveur, Lat. sapor, taste; sapio, -ere, to smack, taste or smell, to relish. Probably the syllable sap represents the smacking of the lips.

Saw. I. ON. sög, N. sag, Da. sav, G. säge. It. sega, Fr. scie, a saw. The origin is perhaps the zigzag or seesaw movement by which the act of sawing is characterised. Sp. chiquechaque, zigzag; Pl.D. suggen, suggeln, to hack, haggle, cut with a blunt knife.
2. Du. saege, a narration, a saying. ON. saga, a narrative.
Saxifrage. Lat. saxifraga; saxum, a stone, and frango, to break, being supposed to be good against stone in the bladder.
To Say. AS. secgan, ON. segja, G. sagen.
Scab. Lat. scabies. It. scabbia, G. schabbe, scab, scurf, itch, from scabere, Du. schabben, schobben, schrabben, to rub, scratch, scrape. Bret. skraba, to scratch, scrape.
* Scabbard. Might be plausibly explained from being made of scaleboard or thin board, in the same way that a hat was called a beaver. Scaleboard—commonly pronounced scabbard.—Worcester.
The ancients—used splints—and of them some are made of tin, others of scabbard and tin, sewed up in linen cloths.—Wiseman, Surgery.
But this explanation is opposed by the OE. forms scawberk (scauberke—Merlin 514), or scaberge (Rom. of Partenay), scaubert (Müller). Of these scawberk may have passed into Fr. escaubert or escauber, by which vagina is glossed in John de Garlandia: vaginas, escaubers. Hence conversely E. scaubert, scabbard. The first syllable should mean blade, as giving the word the meaning of blade-cover, but no one has succeeded in making out that signification.
Scaffold. Fr. eschaffaut, Lang. escafold, eschafaut, escadafaut. It. catafalco, catafalco, Sp. cadafalso, Prov. cadafalc. From Prov. and OSp. catar (Lat. captare), to look, to see, and It. palco, a planking.—Diez.
To Scald. Fr. échauder. It. scaldare, to heat, warm, scorch, scald; caldo, Lat. calidus, hot. Gael. sgald, scald, pain, torture; Bret. skaota, to scald, sting like a nettle; Dan. skolde, Sw. skolla, to scald.
Scale. I.—Shale.—Shell. Du. schaele, bark, crust, shell, scale; schelle, bark, shell, skin, scale. G. schale, a shell, dish, cup, bowl, bark of a tree, cover of a book, peel of fruit, shale or mineral that separates in flakes. It. scaglia, scale of fish, shiver or splinter of stones, skin of snake; Fr. escaille, scale of fish. Escailler des noix, to pill or shale walnuts; escailleures, shards or spalls, small pieces broken or hewed from stones. Fr. dial. challe de noix, the green husk or shale of a walnut. The radical signification is something that splits or separates or that is picked off. The shale or husk of fruit or vegetables or scales of fish are what is picked off as unfit for food. The shailes of hemp (Hollyband) are the bits of stalk that have to be picked from the fibre.
Lith. skelfi, skilti, to split, burst; skel-deti, skaldyti, to crack, burst, split; skalus, skillus, easy to split; skalai, splinters of fir for torches; skilstis, hoof of a cloven-footed animal; skyle, a split, hole, opening. Gr. σκύλλω, to rend, tear, flay; σκύλος, the skin of an animal; σκύλα, arms stripped from a slain enemy, spoils. Gael. sgil, sgiol, shell, unhusk; sgiolta, un-husked, active, quick; It. sciolto, loosed, active. Da. skille, to separate. Melken skilles, the milk is turned. E. dial. to sheal milk, to curdle, to separate the parts of it.—Ray. It. scagliare, to shiver or splitter.—Fl.; Fr. mur escaillé, a wall full of cracks or chinks.

Scale. 2.—To Scale.—Escalade. Lat. scala (from scando, to climb?), Sp. escala, Fr. échelle, a ladder, thence a scale or graduated measure; Sp. escalar, to mount by ladders; escalada, an escalade.
Scalene. Gr. σκαληνός (σκάζω, to limp), limping, halting, uneven, unequal.
Scall. Scurf in the head; scalled or scald head, a scurfy head. Du. schelle, bark, shell, skin, membrane; schellen van't hoofd, scurf of the head. Dan. skaldet, bald, bare.
Scallop. A shell-fish of a round in-dented shape, whence scalloped, having the edge indented like a scallop shell. Du. schelpe, shell, cockle-shell, nut-shell; schelpevis, shell-fish; St Jacob's schelpen, coquille de St Jaques, the scallop-fish or pilgrim's scallop-shell.
Words signifying shell, peel, husk, are commonly derived from the notion of scaling, peeling, or picking off, separating the outer useless portion. Du. schelfe, shell, scale; de vis schellen, to scale a fish, to scrape off the scales; Bret. skalfa, to separate, to split. Gael. sgealb, a quick, sudden sound, the sound of a blow, a slap, then, from the crack of things burst-ing or splitting, to split, splinter. Sgealb-chreag, a splintered or shelvy rock. Sc. skelp, a slap, blow, stroke; to shelve, to separate in lamina.
Probably Lat. scalpere, to scrape, scratch, engrave, sculpere, to form by cutting or carving, Gr. γλάφω, γλύπτω, to hollow out, to carve, must be classed under the same head.

Scalp. It. scalpo, the skin of the head. Sc. shaup, husk; peaskalp. Da. dial. skalp, the shell of peas. Fr. escalbotter, to pill, to unhusk, or loosen the husk of.—Cot. ON. skálpr, sheath. See Scallop.
To Scamble. To scramble, to make shift. Fr. griffe-graffe, scamblingly, catch that catch may.—Cot. Scambling, sprawling.—Hal.
Thus sithe I have in my voyage suffered wrack with Ulysses, and wringing wet scambled to the shore.—Gosson (1579) in Hal.
It. scarmigliare, to card cotton or wool, to scramble, scratch, touse or tug by the hair; scarmigliato, scrambled, toused, scratched, &c. A parallel form with scramble, in the same way that we have Du. schabben and schrabben, to scrape or scrub, or E. dial. scaffle and scraffle, to scramble.
Scamp. A cheat, a swindler.—Jam. A workman is said to scamp his work when he does it in a superficial, dishonest manner. Swab. schampe, liederlicher mensch.—Schmid.
Du. schampen, to shave, scrape, slip away; schampig, slippery; schampschoot, a grazing shot.
To Scamper. Bav. gampen, gampern, to sport, spring about. Sw. skumpa, to jog;—sin wäg, to jog off, scamper away. See Jump, Game.
To Scan. 1. It. scandere, to mount, ascend, also to scan a verse, to examine it by counting the feet; hence 2. To examine narrowly.
Scandal. Lat. scandalum, from Gr. σκάνδαλον, a trap for an enemy, a stumblingblock, offence.
Scant.—Scanty. Barely sufficient. ON. skammr, short; skamtr, a measured portion. I skornum skamti, circumcisâ portione, i. e. parcè, circumcisè.—Egills.
N. skant, a measuring rod, measured portion; skanta, to measure off, to cut off a little so as to make a thing exact, to give sparingly, reckon closely. Skanta, measured, exactly fitted, leaving nothing to spare.
Scantling. A small piece of anything, also the size to which a timber is to be cut. From Fr. chantel, chanteau, a cor-ner-piece, lump or cantle of bread, &c. (G. kant, edge; It. canto, side, corner), are formed Fr. eschanteler, to break into cantles, to cut off the corners or edges of, eschantillon, a small cantle or corner-piece, also a scantling, sample, pattern, proof of any sort of merchandise.—Cot.

Hence to scantle, to cut bits from. 'The chines of beefe in great houses are scantled, to buie chaines of gold.'—Lodge (1596) in Hal. Omnes denarii Jaccenses qui falsi non sint recipiantur ab omnibus hominibus—sive sint fracti, sive perforati, vel etiam scantellati.—Fori Aragon. in Duc.

The sense of measurement is explained by Sp. descantillar, descantonar, to break off part of a thing, to lessen ; descantillon, a small line marking the proper scantling to which anything is to be cut.—Neum.

Scape. Lat. scapus, shaft of a pillar, stalk of a plant ; Gr. σκήπτω, to prop, to lean on.

Scapular. Lat. scapula, the shoulder-blade.

Scar. Originally a crack or breach, then specially applied to the mark of a wound, a cliff, precipice or broken rock, a fragment. It is used by Gower in the original sense :

And eke full ofte a littel skare Upon a banke, ere men be ware, Let in the streme.

Bret. skarr, crack in a wall, chap in the skin ; skarra, to crack, to open. Fr. escarre, breach, bursting open, opening made with noise and violence. Faire grande escarre, to disperse people, to leave a wide space open ; escarrir, to scatter, disperse.—Trev. 'Le canon a fait une grande escarre dans ce bataillon, dans la muraille :' has made a great breach in them.—Gattel. The foregoing must not be confounded with Fr. eschare, surgically, the crust of a burn or ulcer, from ἐσχάρα, from whence E. scar of a wound is commonly derived.

In the Scandinavian and Teutonic dialects the root is found as well in the shape of scar as with the addition of a final d. Du. scheure, schaerde, crena, ruptura, rima, schaere (vetus) scopulus, rupes ; scheure, schore, scissura, ruptura.—Kil. ON. skor, N. skar, notch, breach, cleft in a rock. OHG. scorro, scorra, praeruptum montis, scopulus.—Gl. in Schm. in v. schorren. ON. skarð, a breach, nick, opening ; skarð í vör, Dan. hareskaer, a hare-lip. Dan. skaar, a cut, notch, fragment, shard. E. dial. potscar, a potsherd ; share, the opening of the thighs ; shard or sherd, a piece of broken stone or pottery, a notch or gap, an opening in a wood.—Hal.

The ultimate origin is in all probability a representation of the noise made by a thing cracking or bursting. Comp. SCARCE 557 Gael. sgairt, a loud shout or cry, and thence Fr. escarter, to scatter, disperse, with Fr. escarre, escarrir.

Scarce. OFr. eschars, eschard, escar, close, sparing, niggardly ; escharcer, escharder, to diminish, to spare ; eschas, scarcely. Sp. escaso, scanty, narrow, small, short, sparing, niggardly. It. scarso, scarce, scant, sparing. Bret. skarz, slender, little, close, niggard, clean, cleansed ; skarza, to spare, retrench, diminish, also to cleanse, scour, steal. Re skarz eo hô sae, your gown is too short. Né ket skarz ann éd-man, this corn is not clean. The radical meaning of the verb would seem to be to scrape, leading on the one side to the notion of cleansing, and on the other to that of paring, shaving off, clipping, sparing. Piedm. moneda scarsa, light money, money that has been clipped or rubbed. Scarsolé, to pluck off superfluous leaves and shoots from vines. Du. schaers, a razor ; schaers afschaeren, to cut close ; schaers, close, niggardly, also hardly, scarcely. It. cogliere scarso, to strike a grazing blow shaving along the surface, to strike slanting.

The root may be traced through a wide extent of variation. Sometimes it is found without the initial s, as in Bret. karza, to scrape, cleanse, sweep, to clear out dung ; kars, sweepings, ordures ; karzpren, kazpren, karpren, a plough-staff, stick for scraping the coulter of the plough. The Breton z changes to th in W. carthu, to scour, cleanse, carry out dung from stables or cowhouses ; carth-bren, a plough-staff ; carth, offscouring, outside, rind, what is peeled off ; ysgarth, offscouring, ordures.

With the loss of the final d or z, ON. karra, kara, to scrape, to cleanse, explaining Dan. karrig, sparing, niggardly ; ON. skara, to rake or scrape, to snuff the candle ; G. scharren, to scrape, to cleanse stables, streets, &c.

The ultimate origin is an imitation of the sound of scraping or scratching, which are often represented by the same forms. ON. karra, to creak as a wheel ; Gael. sgairt, screech, shriek ; Sc. scart, to scratch, scrape, cleanse by scraping, gather money in a penurious way. Scart, a scratch, a niggard. ' Move thee to scrape, to scart, to pinch, to spare.'

The same train of thought is indicated in Gael. sgread, a shriek, cry ; sgreadan, a disagreeable sound, noise of anything tearing asunder ; Sc. screed, any loud shrill sound, the sound or act of rending, a rent, the thing that is rent or torn off. See Shard, Shred. To Scare. Sc. skar, skair, to take fright. A skair horse, or a horse that skars, is one that is easily startled. Skare, a fright, a scarecrow.—Jam. ON. skidr, timid, shy. N. skjerra, to frighten, to scare. The idea of frightening is commonly expressed by the figure either of the trembling symptomatic of fright, or of a sudden noise which instinctively startles and produces fright. It has been argued under Afraid that Fr. effrayer and G. schrecken, to frighten, both have their origin in forms representing a crash or crack, and it is probable that scare is derived from a like source. Fr. escarre, breach, bursting open with noise and violence.—Trev. Bret. skarr, crack, breach. Gael. sgairt, a loud cry or shout. A similar connection may be observed between E. scream and Sw. skrama, to frighten.

To Scarf. To join timbers with a slanting joint. Sw. skarva, to join together, to piece, eke out. Skarva en arm, to lengthen a sleeve; —timmer, to scarf two pieces of timber. Dan. skarre, Icel. skara, skjerve, to scarf timber; skarv, a bit cut off the end of a plank. Bav. scharben, to shred vegetables, to make a notch in a timber to receive a cross-piece. Bret. skarfa, to scarf timber or stone.—Lepelletier. The origin of the term is to be found in the scraping down or slicing off a piece of each of the timbers in order to make the joint. Sp. escarbar, to scrape or scratch the ground like a fowl or beast; escarpar, to rasp or cleanse works of sculpture, to escarp or slope down a bank, to scarf timber. Escarpa, the scarp or steep slope on the inside of a ditch next the rampart. It. scarpello, a chisel, lancet, tool for slicing or paring. Scarf. Fr. escharpe, a scarf or baudrick; escharpe d'un pélerin, the scrip wherein he carries his meal.—Cot. It would seem that the name of the scrip was transferred to a scarf from the latter being worn over the shoulder in the way that a beggar's scrip was carried. In the same way Dan. taske, a pouch, becomes Sc. tische, a belt. Dan. taskebelte, zona; taskemagere, zonarius.—Lye. Scheler's explanation of the word as signifying a strip of cloth from OFr. escharper, to tear, is not satisfactory. OHG. scherbe, a scrip, comes still nearer the E. form than Fr. escharpe. See Scrip.

Scarf-skin. The outside skin. Bav. schürffen, scherpfen, to scratch or pick off the outside of a thing. Sich scherpfen, summam cutis stringere. See Scurf. Scarify. Lat. scarifico (for scarifo), to lance or open a sore. Gr. σκαρίφος, a stile, etching tool; σκαριφάομαι, σκαριφίζω, to scratch. Scarlet. It. scarlato, Fr. scarlate, G. scharlach. The origin of the word has been much disputed, and it has been supposed to be borrowed from an Eastern source. But the name of an article of commerce is at least as likely to have passed from Europe to the East as vice versa, and the word admits of a plausible explanation in the Lat. caro, flesh. It. scarnatino, flesh-coloured, became in Venet. scarlatin, explained by Patriarchi as a colour of mixed white and red. But the mixture of a colour with white is considered as a dilution or weakening of the colour, and therefore if the diluted colour were expressed by a diminutive, the full colour would be signified by the primitive form. Thus from scarlatin, a whitish red, would be formed scarlato, full-red, scarlet. Compare Shakespeare's incarnadine, to dye with crimson. Scarp. It. Scarpa, Fr. escarpe, Sp. escarpa, the slope of a wall or steep front of a fortification. See Scarf. Scatches.—Skates. Fr. échasses, stilts or scatches to go upon.—Cot. Schaetse, in Flanders stilts, ' vulgo scace,' in Holland skates; also a carpenter's trestle, the support on which he saws wood.—Kil. Pl.D. skake, shank or leg. It. zanca, shank; zanche, stilts. Sp. zanca, shank; zancudo, long-shanked; zancos, stilts. So Lim. digo, a leg; diga, a long-legged person; digas, stilts. The point in which stilts and skates agree is that they are both contrivances for increasing the length of stride. Du. chaetse (from whence E. skate) would seem to be a corruption of Pl.D. skake, which was Latinised under the form scaca, scata, scadea, scacia, scassa.—Dief. Supp. But see To Scotch. Scathe. Goth. skathjan, G. schaden, to injure; ON. skadi, AS. sceatha, Pol. szkoda, damage, hurt. Gael. sgad, misfortune, loss; sgath, lop off, prune, destroy, injure. To Scatter. Du. schetteren, to crush, resound, burst out laughing, to scatter. It. scaterare, to scatter.—Fl. The idea of a thing breaking to pieces is represented by the figure of the sound of an explosion. So Fr. s'éclater, to crash, to burst or shiver to pieces. Eclat de tonnerre, a clap of thunder; par éclats, in shivers. Dan. sprage, to crackle, Sw. spraka, to crack, explode, show the origin of Lat. spargere, OE. sparkle, to scatter. Dan. skingre, to ring, clang, resound; Sw. skingra, to scatter, dissipate.

Scavenger. The scavage or shewage was originally a duty paid on the inspection of customable goods brought for sale within the city of London, from AS. sceawian, to view, inspect, look. The section De Scawanga, Liber Albus, p. 223, commences as follows: 'Qi est contenuz des queux marchaundises venauntz en Londres deit estre prys Scawenge nostre Seignur le Roy; et comebien doit estre prys de chescun.—Et fait assavoir que Scawenge est dite come demonstrance, pur ceo qe marchauntz demonstrcnt as viscountz marchaundises des queux deit estre pris custume, einz qe rien de ceo soit vendue.' The scawengers or scavagers were the inspectors to whom the goods were actually shown. Afterwards the inspection of the streets seems to have been committed to the same officers, unless the name was used in the general sense of inspectors. 'Qe scawageours eyent poair de surveier les pavementz et qe touz ordures es rewes soyent oustez,' p. 585. The oath of the scawageour is given p. 313. 'Vouz jurrez qe vous surverrez diligientement qe les pavementz deinz vostre garde soient bien et droitur-element reparaillez; et qe les chemyns, ruwes et venelles soient nettez des fienz et de toutz maners des ordures, pur honestee de la cité; et qe toutz les chymyneys, fournes, terrailles soient de pierre, et suffisantement defensable encontre peril de feu.' The labourers by whom the cleansing of the streets was actually done were then called rakyers, or rakers.

-scend. -scans-, -scent. Lat. scando, scansum, to climb (in comp. -scendo, -scensum); as in Ascend, Descent, Ascension.

Scene.—Scenery. Gr. σκηνή, the cover or tilt of a waggon, a tent, booth, stage, or scaffold, the stage on which the actors performed, a scene at a theatre.

Scent. Fr. sentir, to smell.

Sceptic. Gr. σκέπτομαι, to look about, look carefully, consider; σκέψις, examination, inquiry, doubt; σκεπτικός, inclined to reflection; σκεπτικοί, the Sceptics, a school of philosophers who doubted of all things.

Sceptre. Lat. sceptrum, Gr. σκήπτρον, a regal staff, from σκήπτω, to prop, to lean upon; σκήπτομαι, to support oneself on a staff.

Schedule. Lat. scheda, schedula, a scroll, leaf of paper, short writing; schidia, a sheave or thin slice of wood; Gr. σχίδη, a tablet, leaf. From σχίζω, to split.

Scheme. Gr. σχῆμα, outward form, fashion, appearance, from Gr. ἔχω, to have, hold.

Schism.—Schist. Gr. σχίσμα, a rent, σχιστός, split, from σχίζω, to cleave, split, produce fissures.

Scholiast. Gr. σχολιαστής, from σχόλιον, a comment. See School.

School.—Scholar. Gr. σχολή, leisure, rest, that in which leisure is employed, discussion, lecture, philosophy, the place where such studies were pursued, a school.

Sciatic. Gr. ἰσχίον, the hip; ἰσχιάς, -άδος, pain in that region; ἰσχιαδικός, subject to pains in the hips; Lat. sciatica, disease in the hips.

Science.—Sciolist. Lat. scio, to know; scientia, knowledge.

Scimitar. Fr. cimeterre. It. scimitarra.

Scintillate. Lat. scintilla, a spark.

Scion. A graft, or young shoot of a tree. Here, as in scent, the c is inserted without etymological grounds. Fr. scion, sion, a young and tender plant, a shoot, sprig, or twig.—Cot. The proper meaning of the word is a sucker, a shoot that sucks its sap from the parent tree. Sp. chupar, to suck, to imbibe moisture; chupon, a scion or sucker of a plant, a young twig. Gr. σίφων, a reed, straw, tube used to draw wine out of the cask, the sucker of a pump. It. sione, a pipe, gutter, or quill to draw water through.—Fl. Another application of the sense of sucker is seen in Lat. siphon. It. sione, a whirlwind, waterspout, sucking up the water as it passes over it. See Sip.

Scirrhus. Gr. σκίρρος, an indurated tumor.

Scissors. Written by Chaucer sisoures. It. cisore, a cutter, a tailor; cisoie, Modenese cisore, Mantuan zisora, scissors; Lat. cæsus, cut.

Scoff. ON. skaup, skauf, skop, derision; draga skaup at einum, hafa i skaupi, to deride. Thad hlaup vard at skaupi, that inroad was in vain. OFlem. schof, schoppe, ludibrium; Du. schop, scomma, sarcasmus.—Kil. Possibly a shave, a dry wipe.

Compare Du. schampen, to graze the sur-face, to deride, scoff, abuse.—Kil. Lat. perstringere is used in both senses, to graze, and to censure, speak acrimoni-ously.
Scold. Du. schelden, to scold, revile ; scheldnaem, nickname, name of abuse.
From the loud shrill tone of scolding. ON. skellr, clang, crash ; skella, to bang. Hann skelldi upp og hló : he burst out a laughing. Sw. skalla, to bark like a dog, to cry out loud, to scold, make use of abusive language. Alla hans kreditorer skalla efter honom : all his creditors cry after him. Skalla ut, to decry ; skallsord, abusive language. N. skjella, a clapper, rattle.
Sconce. 1. A small fort. Du. schantse, a rampart made of trees and branches, parapet, outpost ; schantsen, to defend with a rampart ; schantskorven, gabions.—Kil. G. schanzen, to make a fence, in-trench, fortify ; schanzkleid, a canvas screen drawn round a ship at the time of an engagement to prevent the enemy from seeing. To sconce or ensconce oneself is to post oneself behind a screen of some kind.
The meaning of the word is something to conceal or cover one from the enemy, from Fr. esconser (Lat. abscondere, abscon-sum), to hide, conceal, cover. Esconsail, a screen or shelter, a sconce, abri, ca-chette, refuge.—Roquef. Guigneville (in Carp.) makes man after the fall address God, Fai moi de toi un esconsail, Un abri [abri] et un ripostail Ou je me puisse aler bouter.
2. A sconse or little lanterne.—Baret. 1580. Scons to sette a candel in, lanterne à main.—Palsgr. Mid.Lat. absconsa, sconsa (Lat. absconsa candela, a hidden light), originally a dark lanthorn. Ab-sconsa, abscons, absconse, luchte, lan-terne.—Dief Sup. ' Debet Prior cum absconsâ accensa per chorum ire ac videre quam regulariter sedeant.' ' Sconsas—nunquam Prior vel Abbas habuit nisi illam quæ omnium communis fuit.'—Duc. ' Lesquelz compaignons alumerent la chandelle et la mirent dedens une esconse ou lanterne.'—Lit. Remiss. 1451 in Carp.
Scoop. Du. schoepe, schuppe, a shovel ; schoepen, scheppen, to draw water, draw breath ; schepyat, a scoop ; scheplepel, a ladle ; G. schuppe, a scoop, shovel ; schöp-fen, to draw water, take breath, let in water.
'Tis as easy with a sieve to scoop the ocean As to tame Petruchio.—B. & F.

Pl.D. schuppe, a scoop, shovel. Fr. écope, a scoop for baling boats.
Boh. kopati, to kick, hack, dig, hoe ; Pol. kopać, to dig, hollow, scoop out ; Serv. kopati, to dig ; kopanya, a wooden bowl.
Scope. Lat. scopus, from Gr. σκοπός, a mark or butt to shoot at, thence a pur-pose or object ; σκοπέομαι, to look at steadily.
To Scorch. The Ormulum has scorrc-ned, scorched, of a crusty loaf, or land shrunk up with drought.
All the people that the violent wind Nothus scorclith, and bakyth the brennyng sandes by his drie heate.—Chaucer, Boeth.
Du. schroken, Pl.D. shroggen, to scorch, singe.
The origin seems to lie in the crackling sound of frizzling or scorching. Boh. sskwrciti, to crackle or fizz as butter on the fire ; sskwrliti, to scorch, singe ; zsskwrknauti, to fizz in singeing ; sskwrk-nautise, skwrkatise, to shrivel up ; sskwrkly, shrivelled, shrunk. Pol. kur-czyć, skurczyć się, to shrivel.
Score. A notch, then from the cus-tom of keeping count by cutting notches on a stick, account, reckoning, number, the specific number of twenty, as being the number of notches it was convenient to make on a single stick ; when that number was complete the piece on which they were made was cut off (Fr. taillie), and called a tally.
Whereas before our forefathers had no other books but the score and the tally, thou hast caused printing to be used.—H. VI.
ON. skera (sker, skar, skorið), AS. sceran, scyran, Du. scheren, to shear or cut ; ON. skor, Dan. skaar, skure, Du. schorre, schorre, a notch or score. See Shear.
Scoria. Gr. σκώρ, dung, ordure ; Lat. scoria, dross or refuse from the smelting or refining of metal.
Scorn. Two closely resembling forms from totally different figures are found in the Romance languages. First, It. scherno, Sp. escarnio, Prov. esguern, OFr. eschern, derision, mockery ; It. schernire, OFr. escarnir, eschemir, eschermir, to mock.
' Eschermirs est quant l'en gabe homme seulement de bouche.'—Roquef.
The foregoing forms are derived from OHG. skern, derision ; skernôn, to mock ; skirnio, a mountebank.—Diez. The radi-cal meaning would seem to be to treat one as dirt, from Dan. skarn, ordure, dirt, met. a scoundrel, worthless person. ON. skarnlega, shamefully. E. dial. scarn, dung ; scarnyhoughs, a dirty drab.

Ambitious mind a world of wealth would have, And scrats and scrapes for scorfe and scorned dross.—Mirror for Mag. in R. v. Scrab.
In the next place, from the helpless condition of an animal that has lost its horns we have It. scornare, to take off the horns, and met. to scorn, mock, flout; scorno, a scorn, mock, flout.—Fl.; Fr. escorner, to deprive of horns, to take from one a thing which he thinks an ornament and grace to him, to lop the boughs of trees, to deface, disgrace; se laisser escorner, to suffer himself to be made a fool, used like a gull; escorne, shame, disgrace; escorni, unhorned, that hath lost his horns, hence melancholy, out of heart, ashamed to show himself, as a deer is that hath lost his head.—Cot.
Scorpion. Lat. scorpio.
To Scoss or Scourse. To change.—B.
See Horse-courser.
Scot.—Shot. Fr. escot, payment of one's own share of a common expense. It. scotto, the reckoning at an inn. AS. sceotan, to shoot, cast, throw down in payment, expend, pay. Pl.D. scheten, to cast; schott, contribution, tribute. G. schiessen, to shoot; geld zusammenschieszen, to contribute one's share of money; vorschieszen, to advance money; zuschuss, a disbursement of money for one's quota of expense. ON. skot penningr, money for expenses on a journey.
Scotch. A notch; to scotch, to notch. Scotch-collops are sliced or minced collops.
What signify scotch-collops to a feast. King in R.
The word is probably formed on the same principle as nock or nick, representing, in the first instance, a sharp sudden sound, then applied to a sharp sudden impulse, a projection or indentation. It. coccare, to snap, click, crack; cocca, notch of an arrow, nib of a pen; scoccare, to clack, snap, or pop;—un bacio, to give a smacking kiss;—delle hore, the striking of the hours.
E. dial. scottle, to haggle or cut badly.
The beef was scottled shamefully.
To Scotch. To scotch or scoat a wheel, to stop it by putting a stone or piece of wood under it.—B. Scote, a prop, a drag-staff or stay by which a waggon is prevented from running back when going up-hill.—Hal. Wal. ascot, anything used to support an unsteady object; ascoter, to prop, to scotch; Fr. accoter, to underprop, shore, bear up, stay from shaking or slipping.—Cot. Lang. acouta, to support, put a wedge under the leg of a shaking table; acouta las rodos, to scotch the wheel. The word scotch is probably identical with E. skatch, Du. schaetse, a stilt, properly a support. Du. schaetse is also a carpenter's trestle, a support for his work. See Scatches.
The idea of propping or supporting rests on that of a shock or push, as shown in It. cozzare, to shock, to butt; Genevese cotter, to boggle, hesitate in reciting, to prop or support; rester cotte, to stop short; se cotter, to break off; cotte, stay, prop, as of a loaded apple-branch, shore of a ruinous building, wedge under the leg of a ricketty table. Vaud. cottar, to push or shut the door, to support, steady. E. dial. scaut, to push violently; as a noun, a dragstaff.
The same train of ideas is seen in G. stutzen, to butt, to start or boggle like a horse; stutzen, to stay or underprop; Dan. stode, to push, thrust, jog; Pl.D. studde, stutte, a prop.
Scough. See Scuff.
Scoundrel. In the absence of any foreign analogue we may suggest the possibility of the word having originally been scumberel, from scumber, scummer, to dung. 'With filth bescumbered.'—Marston. Comp. Da. skarn, dung, dirt, met. a good-for-nothing, a scoundrel.
To Scour. There is little essential difference in the sound made by the act of scraping, scrubbing, scratching, tearing, and accordingly all these modes of action are designated by closely resembling forms. Du. scheuren, schoren, to tear; G. scharren, to scrape, rake, scratch; scheuern, Dan. skure, It. scurare, Fr. escurer, to scour, cleanse; N. skura, to rub, scrape, scour. Pol. szorować, to rub, scrub, scour, to drag as a gown, to shuffle with the feet, also to go fast; as in E. to scour the country.
Scourge. Fr. escourgée, a thong, latchet, a scourge or whip.—Cot. It. scoreggia, coreggia, strap, scourge, whip. Lat. corrigia, strap, from corium, leather. Bret. skourjez, a whip, rod. Gael. sgiurs, to whip, drive away. It. scuriscio, a switch; scurisciare, to switch.
Scout. OFr. escoute, a spy. Etre aux Escoutes, to be on the watch, to spy, from escouter. It. ascoltare, Lat. auscultare, to listen. To scout or reject contemptuously seems to be Sc. scout, to pour forth any liquid forcibly—Jam.; to throw away slops. 'It is also used, in a neuter sense, to fly off quickly, most erroneously applied to liquids.'

But as he down upon her louted Wi' arm raxed out, awa she scouted.
Pl.D. schudden, to shake, to pour. In the last application compare E. scud.
To Scowl. Da. skule, to look with downcast eyes, to look privily from fear or distrust. Pl.D. schulen, Du. schuilen, to sculk, lurk, spy. Daar schulet wat unter; there is something hidden. Pl.D. schuuloord, Du. schuilhoeck, a lurking-place ; schuiltoren, specula et insidiae.
— K. The sense seems to be to look from under cover of the overhanging eyebrows or from under cover of a more general kind. ON. skjól, shelter, concealment, covered place ; skjóleygðr, whose eyes lie deep in the head ; AS. sceoleage, scyle-eagede, squint-eyed.
Da. skeeløiet, squinting ; skele, G. schielen, E. dial. skelly, to squint ; Sc. to shoul the mouth, to make wry mouths. Bohem. sskúla, sskúlina, a (peephole) slit. Pol. skulony, Gr. σκολιός, crooked, bent. ON. skjálgr, skew, squinting ; at skjota augum i skjálg, to squint ; N. skjaag, skjegl, squinting ; skjegla, to squint. Possibly there may be a confusion of two forms, one expressing a covert look and the other a crooked or slanting one. See Shallow.

To Scrabble. To scratch with the nails, to scramble.—Hal. To feel about with the hands.—B.
He scrabbled up the tree.—Mrs Baker. And he—feigned himself mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the gate.—1 Sam. xxi. 13.
Du. schrabben, Bret. scraba, Da. skrabe, E. dial. scrab, to scrape or scratch ; scrapple, to grub about.—Hal. The notions of scratching, scraping, clutching, griping, scuffling, struggling, making repeated irregular exertions of the arms and legs, are signified by a variety of forms adapted in the first instance to represent any harsh and broken sound.
Thus from ON. spraka, to crackle, we have sprákla, to throw about the arms and legs, to sprawl ; G. spratzeln, to crackle ; Sc. sprattle, to sprawl. Lith. skrebsti, to rattle, crackle, signifies also to struggle, sprawl, crawl. Sw. skrafla, to rustle, crackle, leads to E. scraffle, to struggle, scramble, climb, to wrangle, quarrel. In the same way NFris. skrabblin, to rattle, is used in a secondary sense for struggling, working laboriously. A dasker skrabbalt, the plates rattled.—Johansen, p. 49. It. scarabillare, to make a scraping or squeaking sound, screpolare, to crackle, are used as direct representations of sound, while the figurative sense is exhibited in Fr. escarbillat, stirring, quick, lively—Cot. ; Sp. escarapelar, to dispute, wrangle, quarrel ; Ptg. escarapellar, to scratch, to scuffle ; Sp. escarabajear, to scribble, scrawl, crawl to and fro like insects ; escarabajo, Ptg. escaravelho, Lat. scarabaeus, a beetle, the scrabbling animal.
On the same principle Sw. skramla, to racket, clack, cackle. Da. skramle, to rumble, explain It. scaramelare, to play tricks of legerdemain, to make rapid and confusing movements with the hands. Sw. skråla, to bawl, to make a racket, Du. schrollen, to mutter, grumble, correspond to E. scrawl, to crawl about, to make irregular confused scratches on paper. Fr. grouiller, to rumble, in a secondary sense signifies to move about in numbers, to swarm. Du. rabbelen, to rattle, to speak quick and confusedly, figuratively to scribble, scrawl ; rabbel-schrift, a scrawl. See Scraggle, Scrawl.

Scrag. A lean scrag, a body which is nothing but skin and bones.—B. Fris. skrog is used in s. s., while Da. skrog signifies carcase, the hull of a ship. Scrag of mutton, the bony part of the neck; scraggy, lean and bony.
The scragged and thorny lectures of monkish sophistry.—Milton.
E. dial. scrag, a crooked, forked branch ; scrog, a stunted bush ; scroggy, twisted, stunted.
The proximate origin seems to lie in the notion of shrinking or shrivelling. N. skrekka, skrokna, to parch, shrink; skrokkjen, dried up, shrunk, hard, wrinkled ; skrokka, to shrink; skrukka, a wrinkle, pucker, unevenness ; skrukkut, wrinkled, shrunk. E. dial. shrockled, withered.
Pl.D. schrökel, schrökel, a stunted, misshapen thing. Gael. sgreag, shrivel, become dry, parched, or shrivelled; sgreagair, an old shrivelled or close-fisted man ; sgreagan, anything dry, shrunk, or shrivelled ; sgrog, shrivel; sgrogag, anything shrivelled and contemptible, a little old woman, useless old timber, stunted tree. See Scorch.

To Scraggle. Dorset to scramble.—Hal. In Northampton used in the sense of struggle, make efforts with different members of the body.
I'm often so poorly I can hardly scraggle along.
Scraggling, irregular, scattered. Also applied to vegetation that grows wild and disorderly.—Mrs Baker. Essentially the same word with straggle or struggle, an initial scr or str often interchanging. 'I scruggell with one to get from him, je m'estrive.'—Palsgr. The word originally represents a broken sound, then a jerking irregular movement. N. skrangle, to jingle, rumble, rattle. Palsgrave gives murmur or grumble as the first sense of stroggell. 'He stroggleth at everything I do. Il grommelle à tout tant que je fays.'

Probably Fr. escarquiller, to straddle, is an equivalent of E. scraggle, having first signified to throw about the legs, then to stretch them apart.

To Scrall.—Scrawl. To scrawl or scrall is used in two senses: first, to be in general movement; and, secondly, to write or draw ill, to make irregular, ill-formed scratches. To scrall or stir, muovere; to scrall or scribble, scarabocchiare.—Torriano. Fr. grouiller, to rumble, also to move, stir, scrall, to swarm or break out confusedly in great numbers.—Cot.

The two senses may be reconciled if we observe that to scrawl or scribble is to scramble about the paper, to move over it in an irregular variety of directions, while to scrall as a set of young pullets, or an ant-hill, is to be in a state of confused, multifarious movement. It. scrollare, Piedm. scroll, to shake, to wag.

The present is one of the numerous cases in which the representation of a rattling, crackling, rumbling sound is applied to movement of fancied analogy. Fr. grouiller, above quoted, is applied both to sound and movement. Devonshire scrowl, to broil or roast (properly doubtless to make a crackling sound).—Hal. Du. schrollen, to mutter, grumble. Da. skraale, to bawl; skralde, to rattle; N. skrella, to bawl, to rattle, crack, echo. ON. skridla, to rustle like dry things.

To Scramble. To do something by repeated clutching with the hands. To scramb, to pull or rake together with the hands; to scramp, to catch at, to snatch.—Hal. To scraum, to grope about as a person in the dark.—Craven Gl. Du. scrammen, to scratch. It. scaramelare, to juggle or move the hands rapidly to and fro, seems an analogous form.

The origin is probably similar to that of scrabble, scraffle, scraggle, words in the first instance representing confused sound. Da. skramle, to rumble; Sw. skramla, to clash, clatter, cackle. It. scramare, to cry out. See Scrabble.

To Scranch. To crash with the teeth, to make a noise in eating.—B. Directly imitative, like craunch, crunch. Du. schrantsen, to gnash, chew, craunch, eat greedily.

* Scrap. A shred or small fragment. Not to be identified with Da. skrab, Sw. skrap, afskrap, scrapings, rubbish, but rather with G. scherbe, a sherd or fragment of something hard. MHG. schirbe, scharp, schurben, Bav. zerscherben, to break in pieces; schärben, OHG. scarbon, to shred vegetables. Farskirbindn, discrepare.—Graff. See Scrip.

The radical image is the crack made by a hard body in breaking. ON. skrap, crack, rattle. Lat. crepare, to crack, also to break to pieces. The same train of ideas is seen in Fr. éclat (esclat), a crack, clap, also a fragment, splinter; éclater, to burst.

To Scrape. Direct from the harsh sound of scraping, scratching, tearing. N. skrapa, to make a harsh sound, to grate, scrape; skraapa, skraaba, to creak, crackle; skreppa, to rattle; ON. skrapa, to creak or grate, to rattle as hail, rustle as dry skin. Du. schrabben, to scratch or scrape; schraeffen, schrapen, to scrape. Bret. skraba, to scratch. Sp. escarbar, to scratch or scrape like an animal with the paw; escarpar, to rasp; Prov. escarpir, escharpir, to tear to pieces. Cat. esgarrapar, Ptg. escarvar, to scratch, scrape.

Scrape in the sense of difficulty, disgrace, is perhaps from the metaphorical sense of Sw. skrapa, to reprimand. Han adrog sig en skrapa, he drew down a reprimand on himself, got into a scrape.

It may however be from the figure of a narrow exit where you can only scrape through, on the same principle on which we call a narrow escape a close shave. N. skrapa, to get on with difficulty, to make shift to live.

To Scratch.—Scrat.—Cratch. As in the last article, the present forms are direct representations of sound. 'Cratching of cheeks.'—Chaucer. Du. krassen, to scratch, scrape, splutter as a pen, croak as a raven. Kratsen, to scratch, scrub. ON. krassa, to scratch, to tear. Fr. grater, to scratch, scrape; esgratigner, to scratch.

To Scrawl. See To Scrall.

To Screak. Synonymous with creak, as scranch and cranch, squash and quash, smash and mash, &c.

Scream. It. scramare, sclamare, to cry out; W. ysgarm, outcry, bawling; garm, shout, outcry. AS. hryman, to cry out, call.

Screech.—Shriek. Da. skrige, Sw. skrika, to cry, shriek, scream. It. scricciolare, scricciare, to screech. W. ysgrech, a scream.
Screen.—Shrine. Pol. chronić, schronić, to shelter, to screen; Bohem. chraniti, schraniti, to guard, protect, keep; schrana, a receptacle, a screen. In the first of these senses Boh. schrana corresponds to Lat. scrinium, G. schrein, Fr. escrain, a chest, casket, shrine; in the second with Fr. escran, écran, a skreen, the one being an implement to keep something of value in, the other, to keep what is noxious off. The final n is exchanged for an m in Du. schermen, to defend, scherm, a screen; G. schirm, anything that affords shelter or protection, a screen; It. schermaglia, a fire-screen; schermire, scremire, Fr. escrimer, to exercise the art of defence, to fence or fight scientifically with swords or foils. Skirmish is quite a different word.

A screen for gravel or corn is a grating which wards off the coarser particles and prevents them from coming through.
Screw. Fr. escroue, G. schraube, Sw. skruf. Da. skrue, Pol. szruba.
To Scribble, 1. To scratch with a pen, write ill. Scribble-scrabble, sorry or pitiful writing.—B. Fr. escrivaillé, scribbled, baldly written.—Cot. See To Scrabble.
2. To scribble wool, to card, scratch or tear it to pieces with a wire comb. Gael. sgrìob, scratch, scrape; sgrìoban, a scraper, currycomb, wool-card. Sw. skrubba, to rub, to scratch; skrubbel, a wool-card; skrubbla, G. schrabbeln, to card or scribble wool. Pol. grzebać, to scrape or scratch; grzebień, a comb; grepel, a wool-card; greplować, to card or scribble.
-scribe, -script-. Scripture. Lat. scribo, scriptum, to write; scriptura, a writing. Hence G. schreiben, Du. schrijven, Bret. skriva, Gael. sgrìobh, to write. Doubtless, like Gr. γράφω, or E. write, from the notion of scratching lines. Bret. krava, skraba, to scratch, scrape; Gael. sgrìob, scratch, scrape, draw lines; sgrìobair, a graving tool.
Scrimp, Scanty. G. schrumpfen, Da. krympe, to shrink, W. crimpio, to pinch or crimp. See Shrimp.
* Scrip. Pl.D. schrap, Fris. skrap, ON. skreppa, W. ysgrepan, Fr. escharpe, Lith. krapszas, a wallet, scrip. De Guilevilles Pilgrimage, Cotton MS., has, 'I failede a scherpe and bordon,' where the Cambridge Prose has, 'Me failede scrippe and burdoun.' OHG. scherbe, pera; ein scharpe, ein sack, stips.—Graff. From this latter gloss it appears that scharpe was used in the sense not only of a scrip or bag, but also of Lat. stips, an alms, contribution, scrap, agreeing with OG. scherf, a mite, the smallest coin. It is probable then that scrip is properly a receptacle for scraps, a scrap-sack. On the other hand, Bav. scherben (properly a potsherd) is used for an earthen vessel: licht-, milch-, nacht-scherben. And as in the East the beggar collects his alms in a basin, it is possible that an earthen vessel (G. scherbe, Du. scherf, scherve, a potsherd) was used for that purpose among our own ancestors when the term scherbe, scherpe, scrip, took its rise, and that the name was inherited by the bag or wallet which served the same purpose in later times. The former explanation however appears far the more probable one.
Scrivener. Bret. skriva, to write; skrivaner, one who teaches to write, or who does writing for another. It. scrivano, a notary, clerk, scrivener.
Scrofula. Lat. scrofulæ, diseased glands of the neck, from scrofa, a sow. Probably a translation of the Gr. name χοιράδες, which was or seemed to be derived from χοῖρος, a pig.
Scroll. Corrupted from scrow. See Escrow.
To Scrub. Sw. skrubba. Da. skrubbe, Pl.D. schrubben, to rub, scrub; Du. schrobben, to rub or scrape; schrabben, to scratch. Gael. sgrìob, scrape, scratch, make bare by rubbing, curry a horse. A scrub, in the sense of a sorry fellow, a person treated with contempt, might be explained by Da. skrab, scrapings, fig. trumpery, trash, but more probably it signifies only something stunted, poor of its kind. See Shrub.
Scruple.—Scrupulous. Lat. scrupulus, a small stone such as may get into a traveller's shoe and distress him, whence the further meanings, of a doubt or source of doubt, and a small weight.
To Scruse.—Scrouge. To scruse, to press or thrust hard, to crowd.—B. Into his wound the juice thereof did scruze.—F. Q. Fr. escrager, to crush and squeeze out of; escraser, escrager, to crush.—Cot.
-scrut-. Scrutiny. Lat. scrutor, to seek diligently; scrutinium, a search.
Scud. Du. schudden, to shake, toss, jolt, wag. Hence, as the figure of shaking expresses the exertion of superior

To hover over an object, e. g. scud is used to signify the movement of a body under the influence of overpowering force. To scud before the wind is to drive before it without attempt at resistance. A scud of rain is a violent shower driving with the wind.
* Scuff. Skuff or skuft, the nape of the neck. A good skuffing, a punishment among boys by nipping the neck with the finger and thumb.—Whitby Gl. Du. schocht, schoft, atlas, the nape of the neck, higher part of the back on which a burden is borne.—Kil. Schoft (P. Marin), Fris. skuft, the withers of a horse, properly the tuft of hair which a person mounting lays hold of to help himself up. Hence E. scuff, applied to the loose skin on the shoulders by which one lays hold of a dog or a cat. The radical notion is a tuft of hair, Goth. skuft, hair of the head, G. schopf, tuft of hair or of feathers. Skuff is used in familiar language for a disorderly mass of hair. See Shag.

* Scuffle. I. A fray, a close hasty contest. Probably the radical meaning is a struggle in which each seizes the other by the scuff or hair of the head, in which they fall together by the ears. See Scuff. Words expressing the same idea are widely formed on this principle. Thus from G. schopf, Bav. schübel, a tuft of hair, are Austr. schöpfen, schübeln (to scuffle), to pull by the hair ; Pol. czub, hair of the head ; czubić, to pull by the hair ; czubić się, to fall together by the ears ; Swiss tschogg, tschuber, tuft of hair ; tschoggen, tschubern, to pull by the hair. See Tug. On the other hand we have Sw. skuffa, to shove, jog, nudge ; skuffas, to shove or push one another, to hustle ; but the former appears to me the more probable origin.

* 2. Du. schoffel, a Dutch hoe or scuffler, an instrument for lightly paring the surface of a garden bed and cutting off the weeds. Schoffelen, to scuffle weeds. Here the radical notion seems to be whisking or passing lightly over the surface. Du. schuiffelen, to hiss, whistle. Banff, scuff, with slightly whizzing sound. 'A hard the stane gang scuff past ma hehd.' Scuff, to wipe very lightly. Scuffle, a slightly grating sound. 'The scuffle o' his feet gart ma leuk roon.' To scuffle, to rub lightly, do any kind of work, as hoeing, sweeping, brushing, &c., in a slight manner. See Shuffle.

To Sculk. Da. skulke, to slink, sneak ; skulke sig, to sham sick. ' I skowlke, I hide myself, je me couche.'—Palsgr. Pl. D. schulken, to shirk school ; verschulken, to hide a thing.—Brem. Wtb. Du. schuilen, Pl.D. schulen, to conceal oneself, get out of the way from shame, fear, &c. ON. skjol, Da. skiule, cover, shelter, hiding-place. Fris. schuwl, shelter, concealment ; schuwlcjen, to shelter from rain, &c.—Epkema. See Lurk.

Scull. I. See Skull. 2. A small oar. To scull a boat, to drive it by a single oar working to and fro at the stern like a fish's tail. From N. skol, splash, dash, as Fr. gache, an oar, from gacher, to splash. ON. skola, to wash ; N. baare skol, the dashing of the waves.

Scullery.—Scullion. Two derivations are given for scullery, either of which would be quite satisfactory were it not for the occurrence of the other. From Lat. scutella we have It. scudella, Venet. squela, OFr. escuelle, a bowl, platter, saucer ; escueillier, place where the dishes are kept ; sculier, officer in charge of them.—Roquef. And as we have pantry and buttery from the Fr., analogy would lead us to look to the same source for scullery. But the primary office of a scullery is that which is indicated in the definition given by Bailey, a place to wash and scour in. In this direction we are led to ON. skola, Sw. skölja, Da. skylle, to rinse, splash, wash, skylle-regn, a drenching shower, skylle-vand, N. skol, dish-water, Sw. sköljerska, a scullery-maid or scullion. The corresponding E. form is swill or squill. ' I swyll, I clense any maner vessell.'—Palsgr. Swiller, a scullion. Lixa, a swyllere.—Nominale, xv. Cent. Of the hero of a story in the Manuel des Pecchés who became a scullion it is said, He makede hymself over skyle Pottes and dysshes for to swyle.—l. 5827. And shortly after he is spoken of as ' the squyler of the kechyn.'—l. 5913. Other instances of the use of squiller in s. s. are cited by Halliwell. ' The pourveyours of the buttery and pourveyours of the squylery.'—Ord. and Reg. p. 77. Palsgr. has squillary for scullery, and Worcester gives Norm. Fr. squillerge in s. s. In the case of scullery then we must pronounce in favour of the Scandinavian etymology ; but scullion would seem to have a totally different origin in Fr. escouillon, escouvillon ; Sp. escobillon, a dish-clout, oven-malkin ; Lang. escoube, a brush, also a maukin for an oven.—Cot. Sp. escoba, Lat. scopæ, a besom, broom, W. ysgubo, to sweep. In the same way malkin, mawkin, is used both for a kitchen-wench and for the clout which she plies.
Sculpture. Lat. sculpo, sculptum, to engrave, to carve in stone or wood. Gr. γλύφω, to hollow out, to carve. Lat. scalpo, to scratch, scrape, grave.
Scum. ON. skum, G. schaum, OFr. escume, It. schiuma, scuma, Gael. sgum, foam, froth, scum. From the humming sound of agitated waters. Pol. szumieć, to rush, roar, bluster as the wind, waves, &c. ; szum, rush, roar, bluster, then (as foam is produced by the agitation of the waves), froth, foam.
* To Scummer.—Scumber. To dung, and fig. to dirty. OFr. encumbrer, encom-brier, escunbrier, to embarrass, encum-ber, dirty.—Burguy.
Scuppers.—Scupperholes. The holes in the side of a ship by which the water runs off from the deck. Commonly de-rived from Pl.D. schuppen, to cast with a scoop or shovel. Dat water uut schuppen, to bale out water. But it must be ob-served that the action by which the water runs off through the scuppers is very different from baling, nor are they known by a name similar to the E. term in any Teutonic or Scandinavian dialect, in all of which the name is spit-holes, G. spei-gaten. We are thus reminded of OFr. escopir, escupir, Sp. escupir, to spit, to which however the designation of scuppers in the latter language (embornales) has no relation. Walach. scupi, scuipi, Bret. skopa, to spit.
To Scur.—Skir. To scur, to move hastily ; to skir, to graze, skim, or touch lightly ; to skirl, to slide.—Hal. To skir the country round.—Macbeth.
The light shadows That in a thought scur o'er the fields of corn. B. & F.
Gael. sgiorr, slip, slide, or stumble. Sw. skorra, Da. skurre, to grate, jar. The primary force of the syllable scur or skir is probably to represent the sound of rapid movement through the air, as in hurry-skurry.
Scurrer in the sense of scout is proba-bly distinct from the foregoing, being taken from It. scorrere, to run, gad to and fro.—Fl.
And he sent for the scurrers to advyse the deal-yng of their ennemyes and to see where they were and what number they were of.—Berners, Froiss. in R.
Scurf, G. schorf, Du. schorfte, Sw. skorf, scurf, scab ; skorpa, crust, scab.
Dan. skorpe, crust ; skorphud, scurf. Lancash. scroof, dry scales or scabs.
The ideas of scratching and of itching, or the cause of it, a rough, scabby, scurfy skin, are closely connected. Thus from Lat. scabere, to scratch, rub, scrape, we have scaber, rough, scabby, scabies, scab, itch, mange. On the same principle, g. schaben, to scrape, schabe, the itch, scab, scurf; kratzen, to scratch, krätze, the itch ; Sw. klå, to scratch, klåda, the itch. It is probable that scurf or the equivalent scrur, scroof, has a similar origin in a form allied to E. scrub, scrape, Du. schrab-ben, schraeffen, Sp. escarbar, Ptg. escarvar, to scratch, scrape. Pol. skrobać się po głowie, to scratch one's head. Another application of the same radical figure is to express the notion of refuse, worthless, whence E. dial. scroff, scruff, refuse wood or fuel; scrawf, refuse.—Hal. So from G. kratzen, krätze, the waste or clippings of metals or minerals. It is a strong con-firmation of the foregoing derivation that parallel with scurf, or the more original scruff, and related to it as rub and its numerous allied forms are to scrub, are found widely spread among the European languages a series of synonymous forms, of which perhaps the most instructive is Lap. ruobbe, scar, scab, itch, to be com-pared with ruobbet, to rub or scratch ; aiweb ruobbet, to scratch the head ; ruob-bajes, scabby. Fin. rupi, scurf, scab, itch, small-pox ; G. ruf, rufe, Fr. rouffe. It. ruffia, roffia, scurf; Milan, ruff, sweepings, rubbish, filth, scurf; Venet. rufa, crust, dirt, moss of trees; Swiss riife, riefe, eruption, scab ; Sc. reif, eruption, the itch ; AS. hreof, scab, leprosy ; hreofla, a leper; hrieftho (to be compared with Du. scherfte) scaliness of the skin, scurf, leprosy ; ON. hrufa, roughness, crust, scab ; hrufla, to scratch the surface, slightly wound ; Pl.D. roof, rave, rob, scab ; Du. rappe, scab, scurf, scabies quae plerumque decerpi solet—Kil. ; E. dial. rove, scab.
Scurrile.—Scurrilous. Lat. scurra, a buffoon, professional jester.
Scurvy. 1. Scurfy, scabby, then shabby, mean.
2. Mid.Lat. scorbutus ; Fr. scorbut; E. dial. scorvy. Sw. skörbjugg, G. scharbock, are doubtless corruptions of scorbutus, the origin of which is unknown. Perhaps the disorder may have taken its name from the scurfy unwholesome skin of a scorbutic person.
Scurvy grass, provincially scrooby grass, the botanical cochlearia, may be an accommodation from the ON. name, skarfa-gras, from skarfr, a cormorant, the plant growing on seaside rocks.
Scut. The short tail of a rabbit or deer. Sw. dial. skati, tip, point, extremity, top of a tree, spit of land, short tail of animals as of a bear or a goat.
To Scutch. To cleanse flax. Scutched, whipped.—Pegge. Gael, sguids, switch, lash, dress flax. A form analogous to E. switch, from the sound of a thin rod moving rapidly through the air.
Scutcheon. Fr. escusson, a scutcheon, small target or shield.—Cot. Dim. of escu, a shield, coat of arms, from Lat. scutum.
Scuttle. 1. Sp. escotilla, Fr. éscou-tilles, the scuttles or hatches of a ship, the trap doors [properly openings] by which things are let down into the hold.—Cot. Sp. escotar, to hollow a garment about the neck; escote, the hollow of the neck; escotado, a dress cut low in the bosom. From OHG. scoz, G. schooss, bosom.—Diez. See Sheet.
2. A hollow basket. AS. scutel, G. schüssel, Du. schotel, a dish, bowl, Lat. scutella, scutula, dim. of scutum, a shield.
To Scuttle. 1. To make holes in a ship's deck or sides to let out or in the water, from scuttle, a small hatchway.
2. To hurry furtively away. Apparently for scuddle, a dim. of scud. To scuddle, to scud away, to run away all of a sudden.—B.
Scythe. See Sithe.
Se-. Lat. se-, a particle used only in composition, and signifying apart : se-ponere, to place apart. It seems to be merely the ablative of the reflective pro-noun. To lay apart is to lay by itself. Seorsum (for se-vorsum), apart, asunder, in a direction by itself. In the same way ON. sèr, the dative of the pronoun, is used to signify separation : à höfud sèr, on his head; vera einn sèr, to be alone by one-self; sèrhverr, every one by himself.
Sea. ON. sior, sea, salt-water. Da. sö, G. see, Goth, saivs, lake.
Seal. 1. ON. selr, Da. sæl, sælhund, OHG. selach, a seal.
2. Lat. sigillum (dim. of signum, a mark). It. sigillo. Prov. sagel, OFr. sael, seel, Sp. sello, a signet, seal.
Seam. 1. ON. saumr, a sewing, seam; saum thradr, sewing thread. Du. zoom, a hem, brim, border; G. saum, Sw. söm, hem, seam.
2. Fr. saim, seam, the tallow, fat or grease of a hog.—Cot. Lat. sagina, fat-tening, fatted animal, fat produced by feeding; saginare, Sp. sainar, to fatten beasts. Prov. sagin. Champ, sahin, Sp. sain. It. saime, grease or fat.
Sean. Lat. sagena, Gr. σαγήνη, a drag-net.
Sear.—To Sear. Du. zoor, Pl.D. soor, dry; sooren, AS. searian, to dry, dry up. Fr. sorer, to dry herrings in the smoke; Gr. ξηρός, withered, dry.
Sear leaves, leaves withered or dead as at the fall of the leaf; sear wood, dead boughs.—B.
To Searce. See Sarce.
To Search. It. cercare, Prov. cercar, sercar, Fr. chercher, Norm, sercher (Pat. de Brai), Bret, kerc'hout.
The origin, as Diez has well shown, is Gr. κίρκος, a circle, from the idea of going round through every corner of the space which has to be searched. When Ahab and Obadiah made their anxious search for any springs of water remaining un-dried, it is said in the Vulgate, 'divise-runtque sibi regiones ut circuirent eas.' Propertius uses circare in the same sense.
Fontis egens erro, circoque sonantia lymphis.
The monk or nun whose business was to make a round of examination was called in Mid.Lat. circa, Fr. cherche.
'Ordonnons qu'il y aura deux cherches lesquelles on prendra pour un an, les-quelles iront par sepmaines circuir les officines du monastère pour voir si on ne trouvera point aucunes caquetant ou fai-sant autre chose illicite.'—Carp. Albanian kerkoig signifies both I go throughout, and I search. Kerkoig dynjame, I travel round the world. In the same way from Gr. γύρος, a turn, a circle, Mod.Gr. γυρεύω, to seek, search, inquire for; γυρεύω τὸν κόσμον, I travel round the world.
Season. Fr. saison, due time, fit op-portunity, a term, a time.—Cot. Sp. sazon, fit time, time of maturity, proper condition, taste, savour; sazonar, to ripen, bring to maturity, or to a proper condition for enjoyment, to season meats.
Ptg. sazao, proper time, time of maturity, season of the year. Prov. sazo, period, time. En breu de sazo, en pauc de sazo, in a short or little time; manta sazo, many times, often. Sazonar, to ripen, to come to maturity, to satisfy. No fui sazonada de, I was never surfeited with, satisfied with.—Rayn. Dessazonar, to trouble, derange, disconcert. Mid.Lat. saisonare, sadonare, assaxonare, to bring to a proper condition. 'Quod pelles quæ ex dorsis scuriolorum erant confectæ non bene saisonatæ.' 'Item furnarii debent coquere bene et sazonare panes in furno.'—Consuet. Perpin. in Carp. ' Teneatur (furnarius) panem bonâ fide coquere et sazonare!'—Stat. Vercel. ibid. Two derivations are commonly offered, first from Lat. satio, sowing, seed-time, extended to other seasons of the year; the objection to which is that satio does not appear ever to have been used in the sense of seed-time, much less of season in general. The second explanation supposes the word to be a corruption of It. stagione (from Lat. statio), a season or time of year, Sp. estacion, station, a place appointed for a certain end, season of the year, hour, moment, time. The loss of the t, which would bring It. stagione to Fr. saison, is no doubt a difficult step, but the senses correspond so exactly that I am inclined to believe that saison has originated in such a manner. It. zocco, Fr. souche, the stock or stump of a tree, have a like relation with E. stock.

Seat. See Sit.
Second. Lat. secundus, Fr. second.
Secret. Lat. secretus; secerno, secretum, to sever, lay separate, put by itself.
Sect. Lat. secta, for secuta, a following, course of life, course of doctrine, union of persons following the same leader. Divitioris enim sectam plerumque sequuntur. — Lucret. Qui hanc sectam, rationemque vitae re magis quam verbis secuti sumus. — Cic. Hostes omnes judicate qui M. Antonii sectam secuti sunt.—Cic. Sector, to follow. Mid.Lat. secta was used for a suit or uniformity of dress. ' Quodlibet artificium simul vestiti in una secta,' each guild dressed in one suit of colour.—Knyghton in Duc. 'Libram magnam panni unius sectæ,' a copious livery of cloth of one suit or of uniform colour and quality. — Fortescue, ibid. Secta in English Law was also suit or following. Secta curiæ, attendance on the court of the Lord; secta ad molendinum, duty of carrying the tenants' corn to a certain mill. Secta or sequela, the right of prosecuting an action at law, the suit or action itself.
-sect. — Section. — Segment. Lat. seco, sectum, to cut; sectio, a cutting; segmentum, what is cut off.
Secular. Lat. seculum, an age, secularis, belonging to this age or world.
Secure. Lat. securus; se and cura, care, without care, safe.
-secute. -sequence. Lat. sequor, secutus, I follow, whence Persecute, Consecutive, Consequent, &c.

SEEK. Sedate. Lat. sedo, -as, to render calm or still, the causative of sedeo, to sit.
Sedentary. — Sediment. Lat. sedeo, to sit or settle down.
Sedge. AS. secg, carex, gladiolus. Lingula, the herb gladen or seggs.—Fl. Ir. seisg, w. hesg, sedges.
Sedition. Lat. seditio (se itio), a going apart, making a separate cabal or mutiny.
Sedulous. Lat. sedulus, careful, assiduous, sitting at work.
See. Properly the seat or throne of a bishop. OFr. sé, sied, siez. 'The archbishop of Canterbury took him by the right hand and sette him in the Kyngis see.' —Capgrave, 273. ' Quant il fu sacré e miz el se.'—Vie St Thomas. ' E sui assis al sed real.'—Livre des Rois. Lat. sedes.
To See. AS. seon, Goth. saihvan, G. sehen.
Seed. AS. sæd, G. saat, ON. sæd. W. hâd, seed. Lat. satus, sown.
To Seek. Goth. sokjan, ON. sœkia, Sw. söka, Pl.D. söken, seken, G. suchen.

The most obvious type of pursuit is an infant sniffing for the breast, or a dog scenting out his prey or sniffing after food. On this principle we have Du. snoffelen, naribus spirare, odorare, indagare canium more—Kil.; G. schnüffeln, to search out; Bav. schnurkeln, to sniff, also to search about, ferret out; N. snusa, to snuff, sniff, to search, to pry into; Du. snicken, to draw breath, to sob, sigh, sniff, to scent out; E. dial. sneak, snawk, snuck, to smell; snook, snoke, Sw. snoka, to search out, to trace a thing out. Snoka i hvar vrå, to thrust one's nose into every corner.
Now the sound of sharply drawing breath through the nose as in sobbing or sniffing is often represented by parallel forms beginning with sn and s respectively. Thus we have E. dial. snob, to sob; G. schnauben, to snort, schnobern, to sniff, to scent out, to be compared with E. sob; and E. snuff, sniff, to be compared with Sc. souff, to breathe deep in sleep, AS. seofan, to sigh. In the same way Du. snickert, Pl.D. snucken, to sob, correspond to OE. sike, to sigh, and Sw. sucka, to sigh or sob. The syllabic suk is used to represent the sound of sniffing or snifting in Lap. sukt, a cold in the head, to be compared with E. dial. snieke, Du. snof, in the same sense. Such an application of the root would also explain W. swchïo [to sniff out], to search with the snout as a pig or a dog (Lewis), the origin instead of a derivative of swch, Gael. soc, the snout. Hence Fin. sika, Esthon. sigga.

a hog, W. socyn, a pig, as the rooting animal. Sw. söka to seek, is applied to dogs in the sense of tracing by scent; söka som hundar, to scent out; söka efter i jorden, to root like a pig in the ground.
To Seel. Fr. siller les yeux, to seel or sew up the eyelids, (and thence) to hood-wink, keep in darkness.—Cot. It. ciglio, Fr. cil, an eyelid; cigliare, to seel a pigeon's eye or any bird's.—Fl. Seeling (among falconers) is the running of a thread through the eyelids of a hawk when first taken, so that she may see very little or not at all, to make her better endure the hood.—B. The process of enseeling a hawk's eye is described in the book of St Alban's. 'Take the nedyll and threde and put it thorough the ouer eyelydde, and so of that other [and so with the other eye], and make them faste under the becke, that she se not, and then is she enseled as she oughte to be.'
We must not confound the word with sealing in the sense of closing.
To Seem. 1.—Seemly.—Beseem. To seem was formerly used in the sense in which we now use beseem, to become, be suitable to.
Honest mirth that seemed her well.—Spenser.
ON. sama, to fit (as a coat), to be fitting or becoming, to adorn; soma, sama, to be or to deem fitting or becoming. Betr samdi thar: it would better become you. Hann samir þat ecki: he does not approve of it, does not think it fitting. Samilegr, N. sameleg, Dan. sömmelig, decorous, seemly, fitting.
The principle of the foregoing expressions is the unity resulting from a well-assorted arrangement, giving rise to the use of the root sam (which indicates unity or identity in so many languages) in expressing the ideas of fitness, suitability, decorum. N. sams, like, of the same kind; sam, agreement, unity; usam, discordance; sæmja, to fit one thing to another, to agree together, to live in unity. See Same.
We must not confound the foregoing with G. ziemen, geziemen, Goth. gaiman, Du. taemen, betaemen, to be fitting or becoming; G. ziemlich, Du. taemeligh, taemigh, Sw. temmelig, decent, tolerable, middling, the origin of which is explained under Beteem.
To Seem. 2. There is considerable difficulty in tracing the development of the verb seem, to appear. Diefenbach regards as undoubted that it is a secondary application of seem, to be fitting. He quotes E. seem as formerly signifying decere, now videri.—II. p. 192. It is not very obvious how such a change of meaning could have taken place, although, if the meaning had originally been to appear, the change to that of appearing right or fitting would have been comprehensible enough. It is however some confirmation of Diefenbach's position that Bav. zemen (= G. ziemen), to become, beseem, behove, is also used in the sense of being acceptable to one, seeming good to him, and generally of seeming or appearing to one in a certain light. Mich zimet, gezimet eines dinges: I am well pleased with a thing, it seems good to me. ¶Das zimbt mich: videtur mihi, me-seems. Es zam mi, or zam mi, me-thought, meseemed. Zimts di weit auf Traunstein: do you think it is far to Traunstein? Comp. w. of E. sim, zim, to think.
It is to be remarked that It. sembrare, Fr. sembler, to seem, are derived from the same ultimate root from which we have explained seem, to become or be fitting.
There is an accidental resemblance to ON. sýnask. Da. synes, to think, to seem, from syn, sight, view. Mig sýnes, me-seemeth, methinks. Maanen synes os lige stor som solen: the moon seems to us as large as the sun. N. han kann koma naar han sýnest: he can come when he thinks fit, when it seems good to him. ON. mér sýndiz, it appeared to me.
To Seethe. ON. sjóða, to cook by boiling; G. sieden, to boil. Doubtless from the bubbling noise of boiling water. ON. suða, hum, buzzing, boiling. Pl.D. suddern, to boil with a subdued sound; Sc. sotter, to make the bubbling noise of a thing boiling, to simmer. Gael. sod, noise of boiling water, steam, boiled meat. Gr. τρίζειν (of hot iron plunged into wet), to hiss.
To Seize. Fr. saisir, Prov. sazir, to seize, to take possession of; sazina, saisina. It. sagina, Fr. saisine, seisin, possession of land. It. sagire, Mid.Lat. sacire, to put in possession. Regarded by Diez as formed from OHG. sazjan, to set; bisazjan, to beset, to occupy. Gasazjan, to possess; sezzi, possession.—Graff. Mid.Lat. assietare (from Fr. assiette, seat) is used in the sense of giving possession. Quod feudum castri de Popiano fuerat—assignatum, assietatum, et traditum dicto militi.—Arest. Parl. Paris, A.D. 1355, in Carp. It may be doubted however whether the word is not of Celtic origin. Gael. sàs, lay hold of, fix, adhere to ; sàs, a hold or grasp, an instrument, means.
Seldom. Goth. sildaleiks, wonderful ; ON. sjaldan, seldom, sjaldsén, seldom seen, sjaldgætr, seldom got, rare, &c. AS. seld, -or, -ost, unusual, rare ; seldan, seldon, rarely, seldom ; seldcuth, selcuth, rarely known, wonderful, strange ; G. selten, seldom.
Dief. avows that he has no light on the subject either from within or without the Gothic stock of language.
Self. ON. sjalfr, Goth. silba, G. selb. Possibly from the reciprocal pronoun, Lat. se, G. sich, and leib, body, as OFr. ses cors. ' Et il ses cors ira avec vous en la terre de Babiloine : ' and he himself will go with you, he will go bodily with you.—Villehardouin, p. 46.
To Sell. ON. sella. AS. sellan, syllan, ODu. sellen, to transfer, deliver, sell ; ON. sala, MHG. sal, delivery.
Selvage. Du. selfende, selfkant, self-egge (Kil.), the selvage, properly self-edge, that which makes an edge of itself without hemming. De zey'kanten worden niet gezoomd, the selvages are not hemmed.—Halma.
Semblance, -semble. Lat. simulo (from similis, like), to make as if, to assume the appearance of ; dissimulo, to make as if it was not, to dissemble. It. sembiare, sembiare, sembrare, Fr. sembler, to seem, to resemble ; It. sembianza, Fr. semblance, appearance, semblance ; It. simigliare, Sp. semejar, to resemble, to seem like ; It. rassomigliare, Fr. rassembler, to resemble.
Semi-. Lat. semi, Gr. ημι, half; both used in comp. only.
Seminal. Lat. semen, seed for sowing ; sero, I sow.
Senate.—Senile.—Senior. Lat. senex, an aged man ; senior, elder ; senilis, belonging to old age ; senatus, properly an assembly of aged men. Goth. sineigs, aged, from a simple sins, preserved in the superl. sinista, the eldest. W. hên, Gael. sean, aged, old.
To Send. ON. senda; Goth. sandjan; G., Du. senden.
Seneschal. Mid.Lat. siniscalcus, famulorum senior, the steward. From Goth. sineigs, old, superl. sinista, and skalks, a servant.—Grimm. In like manner, the starost or steward of a village, in Russia, signifies eldest.
Sense.—Sensation.—Sensible. Lat. sentio, sensum, I think, feel ; sensus, feel-ing, perception ; sensibilis, that may be felt.
-sent. 1. -sent in absent, present, Lat. absens, præsens, is the active participle of the verb sum (for esum), to be. See Essence.
-sent. 2.—Sentient.—Sentiment.—Sentence. Lat. sentio, to feel, perceive, think ; as-, dis-, con-sentio, to agree to, to think differently from, to think with. Sententia, opinion, pronounced opinion, decision.
Sentinel.—Sentry. It. sentinella, Fr. sentinelle, from whence E. sentinel is borrowed, are variously explained ; from Sp. sentar, to seat, as signifying a soldier appointed to watch a fixed post in opposition to a patrole ; or from sentire, to perceive, as It. scolta, a scout, from ascoltare, to listen ; or from sentina, the sink of a ship, on the hypothesis that the name was originally given to a person appointed to watch the state of water in the hold. But neither sentar nor sentire could have formed a feminine noun like sentinella in the senses above understood, nor could the word be a corruption of sentinatore, which must have been the original form if it signified the watcher of a sentina.
The real origin of the designation is the confinement of the sentinel to a short path or beat along which he paces to and fro, from OFr. sente, a path, the origin of the modern sentier, and of the diminutives sentine, sentelle, senteret, cited by Roquefort. Thus sentinelle (as a secondary dim. from sentine) or senteret would originally signify the sentinel's beat, and his function would be familiarly known by the phrase faire la sentinelle, or perhaps battre la sentinelle or senteret, as in English to keep sentry, whence the name would be compendiously transferred to the functionary himself. Fr. lever de sentinelle, to relieve a sentinel, to take him from his beat.
It is a strong confirmation of the foregoing derivation that it accounts for the origin of both the synonyms sentinel and sentry, the last of which is commonly assumed to be a corruption of sentinel without further explanation.
Separate. Lat. separo, -as, to put by itself.
Sept. A clan or following ; a corruption of the synonymous sect.
Wherein now M'Morgho and his kinsmen, O'Byrne and his septe, and the Tholesbien inhabited.—State Papers, A.D. 1537.
There are another secte of the Berkes and divers of the Irishry towards Sligo.—Ibid. A.D. 1536, in N. & Q. May 9, 1857.

The same corruption is found in Prov. cepte. 'Vist que lo dit visconte non era eretge ni de lor cepte:' seeing that the said viscount was not heretic nor of their sect.—Sismondi, Litt. Provenç. 215.
Sepulchre.—Sepulture. Lat. sepelio, sepultum, to bury.
Sequel.—Sequence, -sequent. Lat. sequor, secutus sum, to follow ; sequent, following ; sequentia, sequela, a following.
Sequester. Lat. sequester, an intermediary, one who holds a deposit ; sequestro, to put into the hands of an indifferent person, to lay aside.
Seraglio. The palace in which the women of a Mahometan prince are shut up. It. serraglio, a place shut in, locked or inclosed as a cloister, a park, or a paddock ; also used for the great Turk's chief court or household.—Fl. From serrare, to lock in, to inclose. Probably the application to the sultan's palace was favoured by the Turkish name saray (from the Persian), a palace, a mansion. Sarayli, any person, especially a woman, who has belonged to the sultan's palace. Caravanserai, the place where a caravan is housed, an Eastern inn.
Sere. Several, divers.—B.

Befor Persye than seir men brocht war thai.
Wallace.
In seir partis, in several divisions.—Ibid.
NE. They are gone seir ways, in different directions.—Jam. Sw. sär, apart. Taga i sär, to take to pieces. Särdeles, singular, special ; särskildt, diverse, different, particular.
The origin is ON. sér, sibi, for or by itself. Hann var sér um mat, he was by himself at meat. 'Their foro stundum bathir samt, stundum sér hvarr (Sw. hvar för sig) :' they went sometimes both together, sometimes each by himself.—Heimskringla, I. 27. Sérlegr, singular, morose. Sérráðr (Dan. selvrådig), self-willed, obstinate ; sérvitr (Dan. selvklog), conceited, confident in his own wisdom.
See Se-. Swed. sin, suus, is used in an analogous way in the sense of separate, peculiar, particular. Sin budkafle i hvar fjärding, a separate token (baculum nuntiatorium), in each division. Sinaledes, quisque suo modo (sin led, his own way), whence probably may be explained Sc. seindle, seldom, rare ; originally, peculiar.
Sere.—Cere. The yellow between the beak and eyes of a hawk. From the resemblance to yellow wax ?
Serenade. It. serenata, evening music played before the door of one's mistress by way of compliment. Sereno (of the weather), open, fair, clear, thence the open air as opposed to the confinement of a house ; giacere al sereno, serenare, to lie in the open air. Sereno is also applied to the evening dew which only falls in clear weather.
Serene. Lat. serenus, clear, bright, calm.
Sergeant. It. sergente, a Serjeant, beadle, also a servant, a groom or squire.—Fl. Fr. sergent, Piedm. servient, a beadle, officer of a court. Li serganz kil servoit, the servant who served him.—Chanson d'Alexis in Diez. Mid.Lat. servient ad legem, a serjeant at law. The i of serviens is converted into a j and the v lost, as in Fr. abréger from abbreviare.
Series. Lat. series, a train, order, row, from sero, to lay in order, to knit.
Serious. Lat. serius, grave, earnest.
Sermon. Lat. sermo, a discourse.
Serpent. Lat. serpens ; serpo, to creep, glide, as snakes do.
Serrate. Lat. serra, a saw.
Serried. Fr. serré, closely pressed ; serrer (Lat. sera, a lock), to shut in, inclose, press.
-sert. Sero, sertum, to knit, wreathe, join ; as in Assert, Insert, Desertion, &c.
To Serve.—Servile, -serve. Lat. servus, a slave ; servio, to be a slave, to serve, to work for another. Hence to deserve, to earn a thing by work.
-serve, -serv-. Lat. servo, properly to look, to take heed, then to take care of, to keep, preserve, or save. Hence Conserve, Observe, Preserve, Reserve.
Session. Lat. sedeo, sessum, to sit ; sessio, an act of sitting.
To Set.—To Sit.—Seat. AS. settan, G. setzen, ON. setja, to place, to let down ; G. sitzen, ON. sitja, to sit, to set oneself down. Lat. sidere, to let oneself down, to alight, to sink, settle, sit down ; sedere, to sit, to remain sitting ; Gr. ἕζομαι, to seat oneself, to sit ; ἕδος, seat ; ἵζω, to make to sit, to sink down, settle, sit.
Seton. Fr. seton, an issue in the neck, where the skin is taken up and pierced with a needle, and a skein of silk or thread passed through the wound. Mid. Lat. seta, silk ; setone, a hair cord. Bret. seizen, a string of silk.
Settle.—To Settle. AS. setl, a seat, a setting ; setlgang, setlung, the setting of the sun. To settle is to seat oneself, to subside, to become calm. In the sense of adjusting a difference, coming to agreement upon terms, there is probably a confusion with a radically different verb from ON. sátt, sætt, agreement, reconciliation; AS. sáhte, séht, peace, agreement; sáhtlian, séhtian, OE. sághtle, to compose, settle, reconcile; sáhtnys, an atonement.
For when a sáwele is sá^tled and sakred to dryhten: when a soul is reconciled and dedicated to the Lord.— Morris' Alliterative Poems, p. 72.
The confusion with settle, to subside, took place very early, and in the poem last quoted it is said of the Ark, Where the wynde and the weder warpen hit wolde, Hit sá^tled on a softe day synkande to grounde. P. 51.
Again, of the subsidence of the storm as soon as Jonah was cast into the sea.
The sé sá^tled therwith as sone as hó most. p. 98.
Seven. AS. seofon, Goth. sibun, ON. siö, Dan. syv, Gr. ἑπτά, Lat. septem, Gael. seachd, W. saith, Sanscr. saptan.
To Sever.—Several. Fr. sevrer, to wean; It. severare, to sever or sunder, from Lat. separare. Hence OFr. several, divers, several, separate persons.
Severe. Lat. severus, stern, rigorous, harsh.
To Sew. Lat. suere, Goth. siujan, AS. siwian, suwan.
Sew.—Sewer, 1. To sew is used in the sense of to make or to become dry. A cow when her milk is gone is said to go a sew; a ship is sewed when she comes to lie on the ground or to lie dry. To sew a pond is to empty or drain it, to set it dry.—B. To sew (of a hawk), to wipe the beak.—Hal.
A corresponding form is found in all the Romance languages with the radical sense of sucking up moisture, the origin of which is shown in Gael. sùg, suck, imbibe; sùgh, juice, sap, moisture, and as a verb, drink up, suck in, drain, dry, become dry; sughadh (pronounced sù-a), drinking or drying up, seasoning of wood; gun sùgh (without moisture), dry. In the same way Sp. jugo, It. suco, succo, sugo, sap, juice; Sp. enjugar, It. asciugare, Prov. eisugar, essugar, echucar, Fr. essuer, esseuwer (Roquef.), essuger (Jaubert), essuyer, to dry, and thence to wipe. Prov. eissuch, Fr. essuy (Vocab. de Berri), E. dial. assue, à sec, dried. Grisons schig, schick, dry; ina vacca schick, a cow that is gone a sew. Schichiar, sùar, sùer, to dry, to wipe. The w. sych, Bret. sec'h, dry; sychu, secha, to dry, to wipe, connect the foregoing forms with Lat. siccus, and show that the latter is (like Gael. gun sùgh, dry) formed on a negation of succus.

Sometimes, instead of considering the effect of the suction in drying the subject from whence it is drawn, our attention is directed to the bodily presence of the liquid withdrawn. In this point of view we have E. dial. sew or sue, to ooze or issue as blood from a wound, water from wet land, to exude. To sew out stamminly, it flowed out surprisingly.—Moor.
NE. seugh. Midland sough, suff, a drain. 'The town sink, the common sew.'—Nomenclator 1585, in Hal. Grisons schuar, assaver, assovar, to water; Fr. essiaver, to flow away; essiaw, essuier, essuyer, esseouere, essiaviere, seuwière, esewière, a conduit, mill leat, drain of a pond.—Roquef. Mid.Lat. assewiare, to set dry, to drain. ' Quod ipsi mariscum prædictum cum pertinentiis assewiare, et secundum leges marisci vallis includere et in culturam redigere,—et mariscum sic assewiatum, &c.'—Chart. Edw. III. The use of seware in the sense of watering is a secondary application, as the water drawn off in the process of draining would often be usefully employed on other land. ' Cum prohibuissera ne ecclesia S. Bertini pratum suum per terram meam sewaret.'— Chart. Domini de Basenghem, A.D. 1220, in Carp.
* Sewer. 2. An officer who comes in before the meat of a king or nobleman and places it on the table.—B. To sew was used in the sense of serving up dishes.
Take garlick and stamp it and boil hit and sew it forthe.—Pr. Pm.
The origin may probably be found in Pl.D. sode, soe (from sieden, to boil), so much as is boiled at once, a dish; een soe fiske, a dish of fish. Sew in the Liber cure cocorum is commonly used for sauce: Hew thy noumbles alle and sum, And boyle thy sew, do hom therinne.—p. 10.
Lay the hare in charioure (charger), as I the kenne, Powre on the sewe and serve it thenne.—p. 21.
It is used for boiled meat in the following passage: At Yule we wonten gambole, daunce, To carrole and to sing, To have gud spiced sewe and roste, And plum-pies for a king. Warner, Alb. Eng. V. c. 24.
The w. forms are probably borrowed from the English. W. saig, seigen, a dish or mess of meat; seigio, to serve up; seigiwr, one who serves up dishes, a sewer.
Sex. Lat. sexus.

Sexton. OE. sekesteyn, Fr. sacristain, the keeper of the sacristy or place where the sacred vestments and other implements of a church are stowed.
The Sekesteyn for all that defense 3yt he save the body ensense, Manuel des Pecchés, ii. 100.
Sextry, a vestry.—B.

Shabby. Mean, contemptible. A term expressive of contempt, of like origin and application with scurvy, from the itching skin and scratching habits of a neglected dirty person. E. dial. shab (Fris. shab), the itch; shabby, mangy, itchy.—Hal. Du. schabben, schobben, to scratch, to rub; schabbe, scab; schabbigh, scabby.—Kil.; schabbig, schabberig, shabby.—Bomhoff. Dan. skabe, to scratch; skabbig, Dan. skabbed, mangy.—Outzen.

Shack. The shaken grain remaining on the ground when gleaning is over, the fallen mast.—Forby. Hence to shack, to turn pigs or poultry into the stubble-field to feed on the scattered grain; shack, liberty of winter pasturage, when the cattle are allowed to rove over the tillage land. To go at shack, to rove at large, and met. shack, a vagabond; shackling, idling, loitering.—Hal.
In the original sense, shackin, the ague; shackripe, so ripe that the grain shakes from the husk.—Craven Gloss. Shack, to shed as over-ripe corn.—Mrs Baker. Manx skah, shake, shed.

Shackle. AS. scacul, sceacul, a clog, fetter; Du. schaeckel, the link of a chain, step of a ladder, mesh of a net; schakelen, to link together. It is not easy to see any connection of meaning with Sw. skakil, Dan. skagle, the shaft of a cart.

Shade. Goth. skadus, shade; ufar-skadrjan, to overshadow; gaskadveins, covering; AS. sceado, sceadu, Du. schaede, schaeye, schaduwe, schawe, G. schatten, shade; Gael. sgàth, Bret. skeud, shade; W. cysgod, shadow, shelter; ysgodi, to shelter, shadow; ysgodigo, to be affrighted (comp. Fr. cheval ombrageux). Gr. σκιά, shade; σκιάζω, to shade; σκιάδιον, σκιαδίσκη, a screen.

Shaft. ON. skapt, the shaft of a spear, a handle; Du. schacht, schaft, a stalk, reed, rod, pole, arrow, quill, the shaft of a mine.
Chaucer seems to use it in the sense of reed. His slepe, his mete, his drinke was him byraft That lene he wede and drie as is a shaft. Knight's Tale.
Gr. σκάπτον, σκήπτρον, a staff; Lat. scapus, stalk, shaft of a pillar, post; scipio, a staff.

Shag.—Shaggy.—Shock. Shag or shock is long tufted hair, long nap of cloth.
Of the same kind is the goat hart, differing only in the beard and long shag about the shoulders.—Holland, Pliny. Buls with shackt heares and curled manes like fierce lions.—Hollinshed in R. Shag wool'd sheep.—Drayton.
A shock head is a head of tufted hair; a shock dog or shag dog, a rough shaggy dog.
AS. sceacga, cæsaries, item frondium fasciculus; sceacged, comatus, comosus.—Lye. ON. skegg, beard. Swiss tschogg, tuft on a bird's head, locks of a man's head; tschoggen, to tug one by the hair.
It. ciocca, any tuft, bush, lock of hair, silk or wool, also a thick cluster; cioccoso, bushy, shaggy, bunchy.—Fl. Du. schocke, a heap.—Kil. E. shock, a pile of sheaves.
Lap. tuogge, a tangled lock; Fin. tukka, forelock, hanging lock.
Parallel with the foregoing is a series of similar forms with exchange of the final guttural for a labial. Goth. skuft, OHG. scufi, scuff, hair of the head; MHG. schoup, bunch, wisp of straw; G. schopf, Swiss tschuff, tschupf, tuft of feathers, hair of head, It. ciuffo, a tuft or forelock of hair, Fr. touffe, E. tuff, tuft; G. zopf, tuft or tress of hair, top of tree; Pol. czub, tuft, crest; Let. tschuppis, tuft of hair, bunch, cluster, heap; W. siôb, tuft, tassel; siôba, crest of bird.
The radical image is probably a shag, shog, jog or abrupt movement, leading to the notion of a projection, then a lump, bunch, tuft. ON. skaga, to project, skagi, a promontory. In the same way Sw. ragg, shaggy hair, seems to be connected with Da. rage, to project.

To Shag.—Shog. To jog, move abruptly to and fro. Shoggle, to shake, to joggle.—Brocket. 'And the boot in the myddil of the see was schoggid with waives.'—Wiclif. To rock, shake, shog, wag up and down.—Cot. W. ysgogi, to wag. A parallel form with gog (in gog-mire), jog, jag, formed on the same principle with them from the representation of abrupt movements by sounds of similar character. Compare Swiss tschaggen, to tick as a clock; schaggeri (stossen), to jog.
Da. skoggre, to make a loud harsh noise; skoggerlatter, horselaugh, roar of laughter. See Jag.

To Shail. To walk crookedly. To drag the feet heavily.—Craven Gloss. Esgrailler, to shale or straddle with the feet or legs.—Cot. ON. skjálgr, oblique.

Swab. schelk, awry; schelken, to go awry. To Shake. ON. skaka, to shake, to jog; Du. schocken, to shake, jog, strike against; Swab. schokken, schokklen, schukken, to shake, strike against, move. Dem schuldigen schokkt das mantel: the cloak of the guilty trembles. Schuck, an impulse; schuckweis, by starts. Parallel forms with Shag, Shog.

Shale. A kind of slaty marl that may be separated in thin sheets. G. schale, a shell or scale. See Scale.

Shall.—Should. Goth. skulan, pres. skal, skulun, pret. skulda; ON. skal, skuldi; G. sollen, shall. Goth. skula, a debtor; Sw. skuld, fault, crime, cause, debt. Skuld på en rekning, balance due in an account. Lith. skeliti, skilti, to be indebted; skola, debt.

The sense of liability or indebtedness is explained by Grimm on the supposition that the original meaning of skal was I have slain, thence, I have become liable for the weregelt. A more satisfactory explanation may be found in N. skil, skjel, skyl, separation, difference, distinction. D'æ skil paa (of anything unusual), there is a difference. Hence skilja, to make a difference, to be of consequence, to produce an effect, to signify, to concern one. Dæ skil ikje lite, there is no little difference. Dæ skilde meg inkje, that made no difference to me, did not concern me. In this sense it skills not was formerly common in our own language.

Now we three have spoken. It skills not greatly who impugns our doom.
2nd pt. H. VI.

It skilleth very much [it is of great importance] in this matter and question now in hand to know the nature of the earth, &c.—Holland, Pliny in R.

In the same way odds, difference, is vulgarly used in the sense of consequence, tendency to produce an effect. 'It's no odds which you take.'

The term signifying difference is then applied to that from whence the difference proceeds, the reason, cause, grounds of an action, the sake or that on account of which it is done, the proper principles of action, equity, justice.

In like manner John the apostle for humilnesse in his epistle in the same skile sette not his name thereto.—Wiclif in R.

Philip heard that chance how the Inglis had done, And alle how it began, and all the skille why That thei togidder ran, and we had the maistrie.
R. Brunne, 252.

Da. han veed intet skiel til det han sager, he has no grounds for what he says. ON. skil, N. skiel, right, just demand; alle ei skjel, one rule for all; ON. göra skil, Da. gjöre ret og skjel, to do justice, satisfy all legitimate claims upon one.

A king to keep his lieges in justice, Withouten doubt that is his office. All woll he keep his lordes in hir degree As it is right and skil that they be Enhanced and honoured.—Chaucer in R.

N. gjera skjel fyr' ein ting, to make satisfaction for a thing, to earn it. Sw. skål, reason, ground, motive. Hwad skål föregraf han, what excuse did he give, what pretext did he make. Hafwa skål att, to have ground for. Han har skål at klaga, he has reason to complain. Med rätt och skål, with right and reason. Han har gjordt skål för maten, he has deserved his meat. Han har gjordt skål för sig, he has performed his part.

From the foregoing forms we pass to ON. skal (pl. skulum), AS. sceal (pl. sceolon), I shall, as fundamentally signifying, I have ground for, I have reason, I am bound to do so and so, to pay a sum of money, &c.

The derivation of shall from a word signifying difference is supported by the analogy of ON. munr, difference, and thence man (infin. munti), I must, E. dial. I mun. Munr er at mans lidi, there is a difference in one man's aid; one man's aid produces an effect. Siafyri mun um eit, to foresee the consequence of a thing, the difference it will make. N. mun, difference, change; muna, to change, to produce an effect, to be of use, to help; mune (auxiliary), must, ought.

Shalloon. Stuff of Chalons.—B.

Shallop.—Sloop, It. scialupa, Fr. chaloupe, Du. sloepe, a boat.

Shallow.—Shelve.—Shoal. Swiss schalb, schelb, slanting, shelving. In proportion as the shore shelves or slants the sea is slow in deepening. Hence shallow, shoal, undeep. ON. skialgr, oblique. Sc. schald, shallow, shoal. Swab. schelb, crooked, wry; schelk, askew, wry, of the eyes or gait. See Shelve.

Sham. Pretended. To sham one, to put a trick upon one.—B. Probably a hide-shame, as Da. skamskiul (skiule, to hide, conceal), Sw. skamtäcke (täcka, to cover), a false pretext, cloak for shame. Hans sygdom var kun skamskiul: his sickness was only a sham. G. schanddeckel, a sham, a flam, what one takes for a cloak to cover one's shame with.—Kütnn.

This pretended zeal for natural religion is a mere sham and disguise to avoid a more odious imputation.—Stillingfleet.

Shambles. Lat. scamillus, dim. of scamnum, a bench. It. scabello, OFr. eschame, eschamel, a stool. AS. sceamol, a bench. Du. schabelle, schaemel, a support, trivet, stool.
Shambling. Du. schampelen, to stumble. Swiss tschiimpelen, to go about in a slack and trailing manner. Sc. shamble, to rack the limbs by striding too far. 'You'll shamble yourself.' Shamble-chafts, wry mouth, distorted chaps.—Jam.
Shame. Goth. skaman sik, to be ashamed. ON. skomm, shame, dishonour, abuse; skamma, to dishonour, disfigure, abuse; skammask, to be ashamed.
Shame is the pain arising from the thought of another person contemplating something belonging to us with contempt, indignation, or disgust. It shrinks from the light and instinctively seeks concealment, like Adam when he heard the voice of God in the garden and knew he was naked. Accordingly the word may well originate in the idea of shade or concealment, and may be illustrated by Pl.D. scheme, shade, shadow; a-verschemen, to overshadow; hevenschemig, dark, overcast. See Shimmer.
Shamoy.—Shammy. Fr. chamois, a wild goat, and the skin thereof dressed. It. camoccia, camozza, the wild goat; camoscio, Fr. sameau, chameau, shammy or buff leather, leather dressed soft. G. gemse, chamois; zemisch, semisch, Du. seem, seemen, seemsch, Pol. zamsz, Sw. samsk, shammy leather. The resemblance to the name of the chamois seems accidental, as it is not likely that an animal so rare as the chamois must always have been should give its name to a leather in general use. Some explain it as Samogitian (G. Sämisch) leather. It must be observed however that the characteristic of the material is pliantness as opposed to the stiffness of tanned leather. Now Du. sam- (applied to leather) is soft, pliant; smeu en sam, sappig en malsch.—Overyssel Almanach, 1836. E. dial. semmit, semmant, pliant, supple, slender. As soft and semmit as a lady's glove. As tall and semmant as a willow wand.—Whitby Gl.
Shank. AS. earmscanca, the arm-bone; Pl.D. schake, schanke, long leg, leg in a depreciatory sense. Da. skank, G. schenkel, the shank; diehschenkel, the thigh. It. zanca, leg, shank, shin. Sp. zanca, leg of a bird, long thin leg.
Shape. Goth. gaskapjan, ON. skapa, Du. schaepen, scheppen, to form. N. skap. form, shape. OHG. scaffelosa zimber, informis materia. Probably derived from the notion of carving or shaping by the knife. Lith. skabeti, to cut; skabus, sharp; skapoti, to shave, to carve; iszkapoti, to hollow out, cut hollow. Abroza skaptoti, to carve an image in wood or stone.
Shard. 1. A broken piece of a tile or of some earthen vessel, a gap in a hedge.—B. Du. schaerde, scheure, a breach, notch, crack, piece of broken pottery; schaerdtandig, gap-toothed, broken-mouthed. Pl.D. skaard, G. scharte, ON. skarð, Da. skaar, a notch, breach, cut. OHG. orskardi, lidiscardi, injury to the ears or limbs. Da. skaar, also, as NE. potscar, a fragment. Fr. escharde, a splinter.
The corresponding verb is seen in the forms Du. scheuren, schoren, to rend, tear, cut, crack—Kil., Pl.D. scheren, to tear away, separate, OHG. skerran, Prov. esquirar, to scratch or tear, OFr. deschirer, to tear apart, G. scharren, to scrape, Bret. skarra, to crack, chap, Gael. sgar, tear asunder, separate, divorce, Fr. escarter, to separate, to disperse. All from the sound of scraping, scratching, tearing, analogous to Gael. ràc (which uses the same consonantal sounds in an opposite order), make a noise as of geese or ducks or of cloth tearing, tear asunder, rake, harrow. See Scarce.
2. A special application of the notion of separating (closely allied to that seen in Fr. escharde, a splinter) gives OE. shard, a scale.
She sigh her thought a dragon tho Whose scherdes shynen as the Sonne.—Gower.
The sharded beetle.—Cymbeline. It. scarda, a scale; scardare, to scale fishes, card wool.
3. Shard, dung.
You forget yourself—a squire, And think so meanly? fall upon a cowshard. B. Jonson, Tale of a Tub, 4, 5.
Sharde and dung.—Elyot in Hal. It is in this sense that 'the shard-born beetle' is to be understood in Macbeth; dung-born, and not borne aloft on shards or scales.
The humble bee taketh no scorn to lodge in a cow's foul shard.
So from sharn, dung, the beetle is called sharnbug, sharnbude, Pl.D. scharnbulle, scharnwevel.
This sense of the word is to be explained from the notion of scraping or raking away and casting out as refuse. G.

scharren, to scrape, scratch, rake; Swiss scharren, to scrape the dirt of the roads; schoren, to cleanse out the dung from a stall; schorete, ausschorete, dung; schorgraben, gutter that receives the draining from stables; Bret. skarza (properly to scrape), to sweep, to cleanse; W. ysgarth, offscouring, excrement; Sw. skráda, to cleanse, to pick, to cast out the bad. Skráda ográs, afskrap ifrán, to weed, to free from rubbish. It. scardare, to weed, is the same word, although commonly explained as if it signified to free from thistles.

Share.—Shire. As scir, a share, a shire or territorial division; sceran, scyran, to shear, shave, cut off, divide, part, share. Pl.D. scheren, to separate, tear away, shear; Du. scheuren, schoren, to tear, cut, burst; Prov. esquirar, to scratch or tear; Fr. deschirer, to tear; It. scevrare, to sever or sunder, to tear apart. OHG. scerran, to scrape; gascer, a portion, division; scara, ON. skari, It. schiera, a body of troops. OHG. scaro, G. pflugschar, a ploughshare, the part of the plough which tears up the furrow-slice. Gael. sgar, tear asunder, separate. Bret. skarra, to crack, chap.

The radical image is the harsh sound of scraping, scratching, tearing, cracking, all agreeing in the separation of a portion of the body operated on.

To Shark.—Shark. To shark is to clutch greedily after, thence to make discreditable shifts to obtain; shark, a fish eminent for its voracity. Du. schrokken, to eat greedily; schrok, schrokdarm, a greedigut. It. scroccare, scrocchiare, to shark or shift for, to shark for victuals, to live by wit; scrocco, any wily shift or sharking for; mangiare a scrocco, to live well at other people's expense, to shark for victuals.—Fl. Grisons scrocc, a rogue. Fr. escroquer, to swindle. Il escroque son dîner ou il peut; he gets his dinner where he can. The signification is attained through the figure of scraping, clutching, getting by hook or by crook. En gierige schrok is explained by Halma, vrek die regts en links schraapt, a wretch who scrapes right and left. And Bret. skrapa, to scrape, is also rendered by Fr. gripper, enlever, escroquer. Skraba, to scratch, scrape, steal.—Legon. E. to scrape acquaintance is to make shift to get acquainted, to seize on any indirect means that may occur for attaining that end. Comp. It. grofolare, to scrape together, to filch or shift for by hook or by crook, to snatch one's meat and feed greedily.—Fl.

SHATTER. The sense of scraping or scratching is commonly expressed by direct representation of the sound. E. screak, to creak or grate like a door or a cart-wheel; scrauk, to scratch.—Hal. The same radical form may be recognised in Da. skrukke, to cluck like a hen, when it is observed that the cries of domestic fowls are often designated by the same forms as the harsh sounds of scraping or tearing. Thus we have Bret. graka, to croak, to cluck, to make a noise like scrubbing a rough body, to scrape; Gael. rácadh, noise of geese or of ducks, noise of tearing, act of raking or of tearing.

The transposition of the liquid and vowel (which often conceals the imitative character of words) leads to Du. schurken, to scratch (schurkepaal, a scratching-post for cattle), Fris. skurke, skark, a scratch or notch—Outz., corresponding to Du. schurk, G. schurke, a rogue, sharper, knave, shark, cheat—Küttn., as E. scrauk to It. scrocco and Fr. escroc.

Sharp. ON. skarpr, G. scharf, sharp. AS. scearfan, to cut in pieces; scearfe, Du. scherf, scherve, a fragment. Bav. scherpfcn, schürpfcn, to scratch, to cut. Sich scherpfcn, summam cutis stringere.

The earliest kind of cutting would be scraping with a shell or the like. Du. schraeffen, Sp. escarbar, to scrape, scratch; escarpar, to rasp, rub, cleanse. Lat. scalpere, to scratch, scrape, also to cut or engrave; scalprum, a knife, lancet, chisel.

In the same relation which sharp bears to scrape, stands Lith. skabus, sharp, to skaboti, to cut, skapoti, to scrape, shave, carve.

Sharper. Properly one who resorts to any means of obtaining money, from Du. schraapen, to scrape, which is specially used in the sense of getting money by hook or by crook; schraaper, an avaricious, unconscientious man. The word would thus be exactly synonymous with shark or sharker above explained.

* But the idea of playing a trick on one, and thence of cheating, is so frequently expressed by the representation of a blast with the mouth, that it is not improbable that sharper may be from shirping. It. buffa, the despising blast with the mouth that we call shirping. See Halliwell.

To Shatter. A parallel form with Scatter. Du. schetteren, to crack, crash, resound, burst, scatter with noise; schetteritighe, sonus vibrans, sonus dissolutus, stridor dispersus, fragor.—Kil. Swiss tschättern, schättern, to rattle like a heavy fall of hail or rain. E. dial, shatter, to sprinkle, to scatter about ; shatted, be-spattered.—Hal.
To Shave. Du. schrabben, schabben, schobben, to scrape, shave ; schaven, to rub, to shave, polish. Sw. skubba, to rub. Lat. scabere, G. schaben, to scrape, scratch, shave. Lith. skaboti, to cut, to hew.
Shaw. A thicket. ON. skogr, Dan. skov, a wood. Commonly identified with ON. skuggi, Du. schawe (Kil.), Sc. scug, scoug, shade, shelter. It is certain that E. shaw was very generally used for the shade or shelter of the woods.
Welcome, quoth he, and every good felaw ; Whider ridest thou under this grene shaw ? Frere's Tale.
I rede that ye drawe Into the wode schawe. Your heddes for to hyde Ritson, Lybiaus Disconus.
Sc. and NE. scug, to seek shelter. The scug of a brae, of a dyke, the shelter it affords. To scug is said of one who is skulking from the pursuit of the law, and is compared by Jam. with ON. skogar-madr, skoggangr-madr, an outlaw, one who has taken refuge in the woods.
Shawl. Persian, shal.
Sheaf. Du. schoof, G. schaub, schob, a bundle of straw, a sheaf. OHG. scoub, a bundle of straw or the like, a mop, a troop. Gael, sguab, Bret, skub, w. ysgub, a sheaf of corn, a besom ; Sp. escoba, Mod.Gr. σκόπα, a besom, scrubbing brush. w. siob, sioba, a tuft, crest, tassel. It. ciuffo, tuft or forelock of hair ; Pol. czub, hair of the head ; Let. tchuppis, bunch of hair. The radical image is probably a projec-tion, bunch, bush. See Scuff, Shag.
Sheal.—Shealing. A hut for shep-herds, fishers, &c., shed for sheltering sheep. To sheal the sheep, to put them under cover.—Jam. ON. skjol, shelter, protection ; skyla, shade ; as a verb, to protect. Gael, sgàil, shade, shadow, cur-tain ; sgàilean, a little shade, umbrella, arbour, cottage, booth ; sgàlan, a hut.
To Sheal. To sheal milk, to separate the parts, to curdle it. Dan. skille, to sever ; skilles, to part asunder. Melken skilles, the milk is turned. See Skill.
To Shear. Pl.D. scheren, to tear asunder, separate, to shave. Schere hen : shear off, pack off, or in Vulgar slang, cut ! Du. scheuren, schoren, to tear, break asunder, crack, burst ; scheure, schore, a breach, crack, cut, opening. ON. skera, to cut, and (as Sc. shear) to reap corn, to clip hair. Lith. skirti, to separ-ate, distinguish, choose ; skirtis, to part asunder ; skyris, difference, distinction.
The radical meaning is probably to tear, from the harsh sound of rending. Albanian shkyir, I tear asunder.
Shears. G. schere, an implement for shearing, scissors, shears. See Share.
Sheath. G. scheide, ON. skeidir, sheath. Sw. skida, shell, pod, husk, sheath. The fundamental purpose of the sheath is undoubtedly the protection of the sword, and the origin of the word may perhaps be shown in Gael, sgiath, a wing or pin-ion, a promontory jutting into the sea, shelter, protection, a shield. So Illyrian krilo, a wing, also protection ; kriliti, to protect.
Sheave.—Shive. Sheave, the circular disc on which the rope works in a pulley ; shive, a slice. Du. schijve, schijf, G. scheibe, a disc, wheel, slice, quoit ; fen-sterscheibe, a pane of glass ; Pl.D. schive, anything round and flat, the leaf of a table. Sw. skifwa, a slice of bread, meat, &c., sheave of a pulley. ON. skifa, Dan. skive, a slice.
From the notion of shivering or split-ting to pieces. ON. skifa, to split, to cleave ; G. schiefern, to scale, to separate in small pieces ; schiefer, a splinter, slate, a kind of stone which splits in flat layers. Pl.D. schevelsteen, schevel, slate; scheve. Da. skæve, Sw. skåfwa, splinters of hemp and flaxstalks that fly off in dress-ing. See Shiver.
Shed. I. A penthouse or shelter of boards.—B. Du. schutten, to ward off, to hedge, defend, hinder, shut. Schutten den slag, den wind, to parry a blow, to shelter from the wind ; het water met dyken schutten, to stop the water with dykes ; schutberd, paling ; schut tegen 't vuur, a fire-screen ; schutdack, an open roof for shelter against the weather, a shed ; Du. schot, a pigsty ; N. shut, a shed made by the projecting roof of a house ; ON. skuti, shelter given by a pro-jecting rock ; N. skuta, to project ; Sw. skydd, protection, shelter, rampart ; skyd-da, to protect, shelter. Suffolk shod, shud, a shed. The origin appears to be the notion of shoving forwards, inter-posing an obstacle between ourselves and the danger which threatens us. ON. skjota (skyt, skaut, skutum, skotit). Da. skyde, to push forth, shove, shoot. Skyde vand, to repel water ; skyde skylden paa een, to throw the blame upon one. Du. schieten, to push forwards, to shoot. Het brood in den oven schieten, to put the bread into the oven. Hence schot, the act of shooting forwards, or the obstacle pushed forwards. Een schott voor schieten, to shove forwards an obstacle, to prevent a thing. Pl.D. schott, the bolt of a door; Da. skodde, a shutter.
From schot again and its equivalents are formed the verbs Pl.D. schotten, schutten, schuiven, to bolt a door, to repel by a panel or shutter, and Du. schutten, Sw. skydda, above mentioned.
2. Another shed is provincially preserved in the sense of parting, difference, from Goth. skaidan, G. scheiden, AS. sceadan, to separate, divide, belonging to the same root with Lat. scindere, Gr. σχίζειν, to cleave. OE. shed, shead, shode, the parting of the hair. 'The dividing or shedding of a woman's hair of her head.'—Fl. To shead, to distinguish; shed, difference between things.—B.
To Shed. Properly to shake, then to shake off, shake down, shake out, spill, scatter. Pl.D. schudden, to shake, also to pour out. Appel un beren schudden, to shake apples and pears from the tree. Bav. schütten, to shake, to spill, to pour. Entschütten sich eines dinges, to rid oneself of a thing, to shake it off. Es schüttet, it pours with rain. Gib acht das d'n't schidst, take care that you do not shed or spill anything. Shedes, pours.—Sir Gawaine in Hal.
Allied with scatter, shatter, shudder, and with Gr. σκεδ (σκεδάννυμι, σκεδάσω), scatter, shatter, sprinkle, shed. Σκεδιάσαι αἷμα, to shed blood; —αἰχμήν, to shatter a spear. Manx shah, shake, shed.
Sheen. Fair, shining.—B. AS. scyne, scyna, bright, clear, beautiful. Wif curon scyne and fægere, chose wives beautiful and fair.—Cædm. Engla scynost, brightest of angels. G. schön, beautiful. See Shine.
Sheep. G. schaaf, sheep. The name has been referred to Pol. skop, Bohem. skopec, a wether or castrated sheep (whence skopowina, mutton), from skopiti, to castrate. It should be observed that the common It. word for mutton is castrato, and the original meaning of Mid. Lat. multo, Fr. mouton, seems to have been a wether, derived by Diez from Lat. mutilus.
Sheer. Altogether, quite, also (of cloth) thin.—B. The fundamental signification seems to be shining, then clear, bright, pure, clean. Da. skiær, gleam, glimmering; Sc. skyrin, shining. Goth. skeirs, clear; gaskeirjan, to make clear, to interpret. ON. skirr, clean, bright, clear, innocent; skira, to cleanse, thence to baptise. Skirdagr, skirithorsdagr, Sheer Thursday, was the evening before the Passover, when our Lord washed the disciples' feet. The sense of clear, transparent, when applied to cloth, passes into that of thin, flimsy. Pl.D. een schier lassgaarn, a wide-meshed salmon-net.
From the same root probably belong Lith. czyras, pure; Pol. szczery, Russ. shchiruii, clean, true, pure, and possibly the latter element in Lat. sincerus.
Sheet. An open piece of cloth not made up into a shaped garment, and thence any flat expanse. AS. sceat, corner, part, region, covering, sheet. Eorthan sceatas, regions of the earth.—Cædm. Sæs sceat, a corner of the sea, a bay. Under his sceat, under his garment.—Bede. Weafod sceatas, the covering of the altar. G. schooss, the lap, lappet, skirt, the loose part of a garment. The primary meaning is a corner, then the lap of a garment, corner of a sail; then, in nautical language, the ropes fastened to the corner of the sail by which it is drawn to one side or the other of the vessel. Lap. skaut, point; aksjo skaut, the point of an axe; skautek, angular; ON. skaut, corner, lap, corner of a sail. Suffolk scoot, an angular projection marring the form of a field.—Forby. Goth. skauts, the lap of a garment. AS. Pes veil, sceat.—Vocab. 11th century in Nat. Ant. Gael. sgòd, corner of a garment or of a sail, sheet of a sail.
Sheld. Spotted, particoloured, whence sheldapple (for sheld-alpe ?), the chaffinch, or pied finch; sheldrake, a particoloured kind of duck. ON. skioldr, a shield; skioldottr. Da. skioldet (of cattle), particoloured; N. skioldet, spotted; skiolda (of snow), to thaw in patches.
Shelf. AS. scylfe, a board, bench, shelf; Du. schelf, the scaffold on which a mason stands; Pl.D. schelfen, upschelfen, to raise on a scaffold or boarding.—Brem. Wtb. The primary meaning seems a thin piece formed by splitting. Gael. sgealb, split, dash to pieces; sgealb-chreag, a splintered or shelvy rock. Sc. skelve, to separate in lamina. A stone is said to skelve when thin layers fall off from it in consequence of friction or exposure to the air.—Jam. Du. schelffe, a shell, husk, scales of a fish; schelfferen, to split off, to scale; schelffer, a splinter, fragment; schelferachtig, fissile.—Kil. See Shiver.
Shell. Du. schaele, schelle, shell, scale, bark. See Scale.
Shelter. Covering, protection. Probably from shield, OHG. schild, schilt. Swab. schelter, guard for a stove.
To Shelve. It. stralare, to shelve or go aside, aslope, awry.—Fl. ON. skjálfa. Da. skjalve, to shake; skjálga, to shake, to make crooked, awry; skjálgr, shaking, failing to hit the mark, squinting, askew. See Shallow.
Sherbet. It. sorbetto, any kind of thin supping broth; also a kind of drink used in Turkey, made of lemons, sugar, currants, almonds, musk, and amber, very delicate, called in England Sherbet. —Fl. There is no doubt that the E. word is from Arab. sharbat, a drink or sip, a dose of medicine, sherbet, syrop; shurbat, a draught of water, from sharb, shirb, shurb, drinking, supping, the exact equivalent of Lat. sorbere, It. sorbire, to sup or suck up liquid; the Arab, as well as the Latin root being doubtless, like G. schlurfen, a direct representation of the sound. Lith. srebti, srobti, sraubti, srúbti, sruboti, to sup, sip; sruba, soup, broth.
Sheriff. AS. scirgerefa, a shire-reeve, governor of a county. The origin of the latter element is unknown.
Sherry. Wine of Xeres in Spain, the Sp. x often representing the sound of ch or sh, as in xague, check, xefe, chief, xeque, a sheik, xabeque, a kind of vessel called a shebeck.—Baretti.
To Shew. AS. sceawian, Du. schouwen, to look, to show. G. schauen, to look; Sw. skåda, to behold, to view. Du. schoude, schouwe, an outlook, high place.
Shide. And bad shappe him a shup a shides and of bordes.—P.P.
ON. skid, a thin piece of wood, splinter for burning; skidgarðr, a fence of laths, Du. schieden, to split wood. G. scheit, a splinter, a fragment, a piece of cleft fire-wood; scheitern, to split to pieces; OE. shider, a shiver or fragment; to shider or shinder, to shiver to pieces.
Faste they smote them togedur That their sperys can to-sckyder.—MS. in Hal.
The origin of shide and shider seems precisely analogous to that of shive and shiver. In both cases we proceed from the representation of a broken sound to express the idea of shivering, shattering, bursting asunder.
In the original sense we have Swiss tschädern, schädern, tschidern, tschudern, to give a cracked sound; tschäderi, a clapper; Du. schetteren, to crash, resound, burst with laughter, to quaver with the voice, then (as the equivalent E. scatter, shatter) to burst in pieces, SHIFT dispergere cum sonitu, diffundere, spargere.—Kil. The sense of quivering or shaking is preserved in shudder, differing slightly in form from shider, while the two senses of trembling and breaking to pieces are united in shiver. On the same principle Bav. tattern, to shiver for cold, is connected with E. tatter, a rag or fragment of cloth.
Parallel with E. shide, shider, shinder, are Lat. scidiae, chips, splinters; scindula, a shingle or thin piece of cleft wood; Gr. σχίδη, σχίδη, a shide or splinter; and as these are undoubtedly connected with Lat. scindo, scidi, to cleave, split, cut, Gr. σχίζω, to cleave, we must, if we rely on the principle of derivation above explained, suppose that it also gave rise to the last-mentioned verbs, but there is no reason to suppose that these latter were earlier in the order of formation than the related substantives.
Shield. G. schild, ON. skjóldr. Commonly referred to ON. skjól, shelter, protection, skyla, to cover, protect, as ON. hlíf, a shield, hlífa, to protect. Gael. sgàil, shade, covering, curtain.
Shift. The older sense of dividing, distributing, allotting, is now nearly obsolete. Shifting, in Kent, the partition of land among coheirs.—B.
God clepeth folk to him in sondry wise And everich hath of God a propre gift Som this, som that, as that him liketh shift.
Chaucer, W. of B. Prol.
ON. skipa, to ordain, arrange; skipta, to distribute, share, arrange a succession among heirs, booty among captors. Gud skipti með okkr: let God deal with us two, let him allot to each what seems good to him. Skipta is then, like E. shift, to change.
N. skipa, to arrange, appoint; skipta, skifta, Da. skifte, to partition, shift, change. A shift or woman's smock is not, as Richardson explains it, a garment often shifted, but simply a change of linen, as a delicate periphrasis which lost its virtue when shift was no longer understood as a special application of the sense of change. The name then became liable to the same feeling which made smock obsolete, and has in modern times been widely replaced by the Fr. chemise.
The radical meaning of the verb seems to be to give shape or form to. AS. sceopan, scyppan, to form, create, ordain. Ic hiwige oththe scyppe: I form or create. Alfr. Gr., where it will be observed that the synonymous hiwige is derived in an analogous manner from hiw, form, fashion, appearance.
Pl.D. schippen, to give a thing its form and appearance, to arrange. 'Du hest hier niks to schippen:' you have nothing to meddle with here. Misschippen, to deform, misfit; umschip-pen, to alter, change the form of a thing.—Brem. Wtb. The same change of ch and f which is seen in Pl.D. achter, E. after, in Du. schacht and schaft, a shaft, lucht and luft, left, Pl.D. lucht and luft, air, identifies shift with G. schicht, a part or division; erbschicht, share of an in-heritance. Schicht is also a layer, stratum, row, so much of a certain arrangement as is laid out at one continuance without a break. Eine rede in drei theilen schichten: to arrange a discourse in three parts.
A special application is to a definite period of work, as (when the day is divided into three parts) früh-, tage-, nacht-schicht, the morning, day, and night-shift. Schicht halten, to take one's turn or shift of work. In the same sense Pl.D. schuft, schuft-tied. Das kann ich in einer schuft thun: I can do that without resting.—Adelung. Du. schoft, schoff, the division of the day's work into four parts; also the meals by which they are broken. Schoften, schoffen, to rest or to take meals at the stated hours.—Kil. G. bierschicht, pause when workmen leave their work for a draught of beer. Thus schicht, or the equivalent shift, might be applied to the breaking off of the old strain or the commencement of a new one, and hence acquires the sense of change. A shift of work is properly a bout of work, the period during which the labourer works at a single stretch, but is subsequently applied to the change of workmen at the expiration of the proper time. In the same way a shift of linen would properly be the period during which a shirt would wear without washing, then the entrance on a new shift, or the change of shirt when the old one was sufficiently worn.
It is in this sense of a turn of work that the word is used when we speak of making shift, making a thing serve our turn. To shift is to do the duty of the hour; a shifty person, one skilled at turn-ing his hand to various kinds of work. Shilling. G. schilling, a piece of money, a definite number of certain things, or a definite quantity of materials. The most likely suggestion as to the origin is that supported by Ihre, from Sw. skilja, to divide. The name, according to his view, would be originally given to those pieces of money which were stamped with an indented cross, so that they could easily be broken into four, and the quarter of which was in AS. called feorthlyng, a farthing or ferlyng, or styca, a bit.
To Shimmer. G. schimmern, Pl.D. schemern, Sw. skimra, to glimmer, flicker, shine unsteadily or obscurely, whence Du. schemeren, schemelen, to shade, Pl.D. scheme, shade, shadow. We have frequently had occasion to observe that ideas connected with the faculty of sight are expressed by words applying in the first instance to the phe-nomena of sound. Thus Fin. kilina is rendered tinnitus clarus, splendor clarus; kiliä, clarè tinniens, clarè lucens; kilistää, tinnitum clarum moveo, splendorem cla-rum reflecto; kimistä, acutè tinnio (comp. E. chime); kimaltaa, kiimottaa, to glitter, sparkle; komista, to sound deep or hollow; komottaa, to shine as the moon. Esthon. kum, noise, shine, brilliancy; kumama, to glow; kummama, to roar, hum, tingle, to shine. Du. scha-teren, schetteren, to ring, crash, resound; schitteren, to glitter, shine. The same relation holds good between Pol. szemrać (sz = E. sh), to murmur, mutter, rustle, or the equivalent E. simmer (in Suffolk shimper), to make a gentle hissing or rustling noise like liquids just beginning to boil, and shimmer, to shine unsteadily or faintly.
From the frequentative, which in imi-tative words is usually the original form, are developed OHG. scimo, splendour, brilliancy, ray of light, sciman, to glitter; ON. skima, splendour, reflection, and, as a verb, to glance suspiciously round; AS. sciman, to glitter, to squinny, still pre-served in the provincial skime, a ray of light, also to look at a person in an un-derhand way; shim, appearance, white streak on the face of a horse.—Hal. N. skjoma, to glance, to flicker; Pl.D. scheme, reflexion, shade. Shin. G. schiene, a splint or thin piece of wood, splint for a broken arm, tire of a wheel or strip of iron with which it is bound round. Armschiene, beinschiene, a piece of armour for the arm or thigh; schienbein, the shinbone, so called from its sharp edge like a splint of wood. The analogous bone in a horse is called the splintbone. The original meaning of the word is probably a splinter or fragment, from a form like E. dial. shinder, to shiver to pieces. Adelung mentions an obsolete schinen, to split, and perhaps Lat. scindere may be referred to the same root if the primary sense were to burst asunder, then to separate, to cut. For the ultimate origin, see Shingle.
**Shine.** Goth. *skeinan*, ON. *skina*, G. *scheinen*, to shine. Bret. *skina*, to spread, to scatter, *skin*, ray, spoke of a wheel, furrow.
The resemblance of the forms *shime* and *shine*, however striking, is probably not to be accounted for on the supposition of a confusion between the pronunciation of *m* and *n*, but rather from both the foregoing forms having arisen from independent representations of somewhat similar sounds.
In designating the phenomena of sight we are necessarily driven to comparison with sounds which produce an analogous effect upon our sensitive frame. Thus the sudden appearance of a brilliant light is represented by the sound of an explosion, and a sparkling or broken glitter by the sound of crackling. Fr. *éclat*, originally representing a loud smart sound, is applied to a brilliant light; *éclat de tonnerre*, a clap of thunder; *éclat de lumière*, a sudden flash of light. *Pétiller*, to crackle, also to sparkle, twinkle. Du. *schetteren*, *schateren*, to crash, resound; *schitteren*, to glitter. At the same time, the sounds employed as the types of visual conceptions have their connections also in the realm of mechanical action. A loud and sudden crash suggests the notion of explosive action, bursting asunder, shivering to pieces, while a crackling sound is connected with the idea of vibratory or broken movement. S'*éclater*, to burst, crash, shiver into splinters; *éclat*, a shiver, splinter, small piece of wood broken off with violence.—Cot. Du. *schetteren* is identical with E. *scatter*, and was formerly used in the same sense; *diffundere, dispergere cum sonitu*.—Kil. In like manner Da. *sprage*, to crackle, corresponds with Lat. *spargere* and with E. *sparkle*, which itself was formerly used in the sense of scatter. 'I *sparkyl* abroode, I sprede thynges asonder.'—Palsgr. Hence may be explained the relation of Bret. *skin*, dispersion, as well as of G. *schiene* (mentioned under Shin), a shiver, splinter, to E. *shine*.
When we look for forms representing sound which might, on the principle above explained, give rise to the root *skin* signifying shine, we meet with Da. *skingre*, to ring, clang, resound, leading to Sw. *skingra*, to disperse, scatter, and Sc. *skinkle*, to sparkle.

The gay mantel Was *skinkland* in the sun.—Jam.
In Lat. *scintilla*, a spark, the sound of *kl* in *skinkle* is exchanged for *tl*, in a manner analogous to the interchange of *gl* and *dl* in E. *shingle* and G. *schindel*, or in N. *singra*, to jingle, and ON. *sindra*, to sparkle.
**Shingle.—Shindle.** 1. A lath or cleft wood to cover houses with.—B. It. *scandole*, laths or shindells.—Fl. G. *schindel*, a shingle, a splint for a broken arm. Lat. *scandula*, *scindula*, a shingle.
The idea of breaking to pieces is commonly expressed by reference to the sound of an explosion, as explained under Shine. Thus OFr. *esclat*, properly signifying a clap or crack, is used in the sense of a shiver, splinter, also a small and thin lath or shingle.—Cot. The origin of *shingle*, *shindle*, is shown in Dan. *skingre*, to ring, clang, resound, leading to Sw. *skingra*, to disperse, scatter. In E. dial. *shinder*, to shiver to pieces, the sound of *ng* exchanges for *nd* as in *shingle* and *shindle*, or in N. *singra*, to jingle, and ON. *sindra*, to sparkle. The dental is also found in Lat. *scindere*, to split, and in It. *schiantare*, to rap, split, or burst in sunder, whence *schiantolo*, a splinter, shiver [*shindle*].—Fl.
**Shingle.** 2. The pebbles on the seashore, from the jingling noise made by every wave on a shingly beach. N. *singla*, *singra*, to jingle, clink; *singl*, gravel, shingle.
**Ship.** Goth. *skip*, G. *schiff*, Fr. *esquif*, It. *schiffo*, Lat. *scapha*, Bret. *skaf*, ship, boat. Gr. *σκάφη*, anything scooped or dug out, a hollow vessel, tub, bason, bowl; a light boat or skiff: *σκάπτω*, to dig. The first boat would be a canoe or hollowed trunk, now called a dug-out in the U. S.
**Shire.** See Share.
**To Shirk.—Sherk.** A modification of *shark*, signifying, in the first instance, to obtain by rapacious or unfair proceeding, then to deal unfairly, and finally to avoid or escape from anything by underhand proceeding. 'Certainly he (Laud) might have spent his time much better—in the pulpit than thus *sherking* and raking in the tobacco shops.'—State Trials in R. Laud was accused of fraud in contracting for licenses to sell tobacco. 'Idle companions that *shirke* living from others, but time from yourselves.'—Bp Rainboro in R.
**Shirt.—Skirt.** ON. *skyrta*, Da. *skiorte*, Sw. *skjorta*, shirt; Da. *skiort*, Sw. *skorte*, skirt. The original meaning of *shirt* seems to have been a short garment, while *skirt* is the part shortened or tucked up for the convenience of action. AS. sceort, short; sceortian, scyrtan, to shorten; OHG. scurz, short; scurziu kauuati, short garments. Walach. scurtu, short; scurtâ, to shorten; scurtéicâ, a short garment (togula superior), small upper cloak.
Bibelesworth distinguishes O Fr. eschmir, a shirt, and escour, a skirt.
Prenez, valets en vos eschours [the schirtes] De ço frael hareng rous.
Par devant avet escour [the shirte beforne] Et de cote sont gerons [gores] —Nat. Antiq.
Escourchi, tucked up.—Roquef. Du. schorssen, schorten, to tuck up, suspend, be wanting; schorsse, schorte, an apron, upper petticoat. Pl.D. upschorten, Da. skiorte, opskiirte, to tuck up one's clothes. G. schurz, schürze, an apron; schürzen, to truss or tuck up; die ärmel schürzen, to tuck up the sleeves.
Shive. See Sheave.
To Shiver. Written chiver, chever, by Chaucer. Chyveryng or quakyng for cold. Chymerynge or chyverynge, or dyderynge, frigutus.—Pr. Pm.
The analogy between sound and movement enables us to speak of a quivering or tremulous sound and a quivering or tremulous motion, and thence to designate the motion by what was originally meant as a representation of the sound. Thus the word chitter, originally representing confused, broken sound, as the chirping of birds, is applied to trembling movement; 'Chytteryng, quivering or shakyng for cold.'—Huloet in Hal. So Du. quetteren, to chirp, corresponds to Lat. quatere, to shake. Du. schetteren, to crack, to warble, is also rendered by the Lat. tremere, intremere. Schetteringhe, sonus vibrans, stridor dispersus, modulatio.—Kil.
On the same principle, Sp. quiebro, a trill or quaver, leads to E. quiver, to tremble, Du. kuyveren, kuyven, to shiver, tremble, parallel forms with Lat. vibrare.
The same variation of the initial consonant which is seen in shake as compared with quake, or in Du. schetteren as compared with quetteren, brings quiver into parallelism with shiver, Lower Rhine schoeveren, to tremble.
When a body not altogether rigid is violently shaken, the parts of which it is composed are flung into movement in a variety of directions, and seem to be flying apart from each other. Thus the senses of shaking and of breaking to pieces are frequently united, and we speak of shivering a pane of glass, breaking a thing to shivers.
The birdes song— So loud ysang that all the wode yrong Like as it should shiver in pecis small.
Chaucer, Black Knight.
And than the Squyer wrocht greit wonder Ay till his sword did shaik in sunder.
Squyer Meldrum, 156.
She dithered an' sha'k, you thought she wad ha' tummled i' bits. — Cleveland, Gloss. in v. dither.
Du. scheveren, to break to pieces; scheve, a shive, a fragment; scheversteen, slate, stone that splits up into slices. ON. skifa. Da. skive, a thin slice; skifa, to cleave or split.
In the same way ON. skjalfa. Da. skjælve, to tremble, are connected with Du. schelfe, schelve, schelfer, a scale, crum, splinter, fragment; E. quiver, to tremble, with Sp. quiebra, crack, fracture; quebrar, to break.
Shoal. I. AS. theofsceol, a gang of thieves; thegnscole, a train of retainers. Du. school, a shoal of fishes, flock of birds. En school vinken, a flock of sparrows. Ir. sgol, a scull, school, or shoal of fishes.
The radical meaning seems to be a clump or mass. Du. scholle, a clod, mass, lump of ice; scholen, to flock or crowd together. It. zolla, a clod; zollare, to grow together in clods; zolle dell' aria, the clouds. 'A cloud of witnesses.' Mod. Gr. σκόυλα, a mass, lock of wool, flax, &c. Compare flock of wool, flock of sheep, of birds, &c. 2. A shallow place in the sea. Perhaps from Fr. escueil, écueil. It. scoglio, Sp. escollo, a shelf on the sea, or rock under shallow water, from Lat. scopulus, a rock. More probably however it corresponds to Sc. schald, schaul, shallow. 'The schaldis of Affrik:' syrtes—D. V. 'Shawl waters maik maist din.'—Ramsay, Sc. Prov.
Shock. I. Fr. choquer, Sp. chocar, Du. schokken, to jog, jolt, knock against.
The word is of analogous formation with cock, kick, cog, shag, shog, jag, jig, jog, &c., from a form in the first instance representing an abrupt sound, then used to signify an abrupt movement, a projection, prominence, bunch or tuft.
Forms closely bordering on the syllable shock are used to represent broken sound in Sc. chack, to clack or click; E. dial. chackle, to chatter; Sp. chacolotear, to rattle like a loose shoe; Swiss tschaggen, to tick like a clock; Da. skoggre, skoggerlee, to roar with laughter. Pl.D.

suk! is used to represent the jolt of a rough conveyance. Of a rough horse they say, Das geit jummer suk! suk! it goes always suk! suk! Ene olde suksuk, an old rattle-trap, of an old spinning-wheel, or a jogging-horse. Hence suk-keln, G. schückeln, schaukeln, schokkeln, Fr. sagotter, to shake, jolt, jog.
2. Shock, tufted hair, pile of sheaves. See Shag.

Shoe. Goth. skohs, ON. skor, G. schuh.

To Shog. To jog, joggle, or make to vacillate.—B. Swiss schauggen, schaggen, to jog; W. ysgogi, to wag. See Shag, Shock.

To Shoot. ON. skjota, Du. schieten, G. schiessen, to dart, shoot, move with impetuosity. A shoot or young branch is the growth shot out in a single season.

Shop.—Shippen. Fr. eschope, a stall or little shop; G. schoppen, Pl.D. schupp, a shed; AS. scypen, a stall, stable, shed; NE. shippen, a cow-house; ON. skápr, Da. skab, Sw. skáp, a press or cupboard.

Shore. 1. The border of the land, or extremity where the land is broken off. Du. schore, ruptura, scissura, rima, et acta, ripa—Kil. ; scheuren, schoren, to burst, split, tear, divide; Pl.D. schoren, to tear asunder. See Shard.
2. A prop. N. skora, ON. skorða, a shore or prop, the shores or stocks by which a ship is supported on dry land. N. skora, skara, to hew; skorasponc, chips. The word properly means a piece or length of timber. Bav. schrot, a piece of bread, flesh, cloth, paper, especially a length of timber, Abschnitt von Holzstämmen.—Schmeller. In the same way G. Stolle, a piece; stollen, a support, prop, pedestal. See Shard, Sherd.
3. A public drain. Erroneously supposed to be a corruption of sewer. It is really from G. scharren, to scrape, Swiss schoren, to cleanse, sweep out stables, whence Schorete, Ausschorete, what is scraped or swept out, dung, manure; Schorgraben, the drain which receives the runnings of the cattle. So shoreditch is the ditch which receives the scrapings of the streets. The scavengers were formerly called rakiers, scrapers. Item quod homines cujuslibet Wardæ habeant rastratores sufficientes ad purgandas Wardas de diversis fimis.—Liber Albus, 258. See Shard.

Short. 1. AS. sceort, OHG. scurz, Walach. sciurta, Alban. shkourte, G. kurz, Lat. curtius, Pol. krotki, short; skrocić, to shorten.
2. Applied in a technical way to the quality of iron it signifies brittle; hot-short, red-short, &c. In this combination it is often pronounced and sometimes written shear, as red-shear iron, and is from Sw. skör, brittle.—Marsh. The technical terms of iron point to Sweden as the early seat of the manufacture, as in the case of Sw. wälla, to weld iron.

Shoulder. OHG. scultara, G. Schulter. Connected by some with ON. skjöldr, a shield, a derivation supported by E. dial. shield-bones, blade-bone.—Hal. But perhaps a more likely origin is the broad shovel-like shape of the bones. E. dial. shull, a shovel; shull-bane, the shoulder-blade. The G. Schaufel is applied to any broad flat implement, as the blade of an oar, fluke of an anchor. Pol. łopata signifies a shovel, oven-peel, blade of an oar, while the dim. łopatka is a shoulder-blade. Lat. scapula may not improbably be identical with G. Schaufel. In parts of England the shoulder is called spade-, spaud-, or spaw-bone, from Sc. spald, spauld, spawl, Fr. espaule, Sp. espalda, Prov. espatla, It. spalla, a shoulder, showing the same relation to Lat. spatha, spatula, a spatula, spattle or broad slice, and to E. spade, as that which has been shown above between shoulder and shovel.

To Shout. A parallel form with hoot, as E. dial. siss and hiss, Pl.D. schuddern and huddern, to shudder. It. scioare, to cry shoo! to frighten birds. Mod. Gr. ὀκοάζω, to shout.

Shove. Du. schuiven, G. schieben, ON. skufa, N. skuva, skyve, to shove, push, draw; Du. gaan schuiven, to abscond, steal away. Fr. esquiver, Sp. esquivar, Grisons schivir, to slip aside, avoid, escape; It. schifare, schivare, to shun, avoid, to loathe, or abhor. It is to be remarked that the proper meaning of shun is to shove or push, then to avoid.

Shovel. G. Schaufel, Du. schuffel, schuyffel, schoepe, schuppe, a shovel or similar implement. The meaning would seem to be an implement for digging. Pol. kopać, to dig, scoop, hollow; kopnąć nogą (noga, foot), to kick; kopystka, a spattle; Boh. kopati, to dig; skopati, to dig away; kopyto, hoof; kopeysko, a coal-shovel. Russ. kopnut', to dig; kopanie, digging; kopanitza, a spade, shovel. Walach. scobi, to scoop, hollow out, carve in wood, stone, &c. Bret. skop, skob, a scoop, bowl. As digging is a coarser kind of scraping, Lat. scabere, G. schaben, and E. shave, must probably be closely allied. N. skavl, skjevla, a scraper.

Shower. Goth. skura windis, a storm of wind. ON. skúr, a shower of rain.

Pl.D. schuur, a passing fit of illness. Dat dulle schuur hebben, to have an attack of madness. Dat schuur is vorbi, the fit is passed. Bi schuren, at recurring intervals.
The origin is probably shown in G. schaudern, schauern, to shudder, shiver; schauer, a trembling, shivering, especially that of cold or fever. Then, taking an attack of fever as the type of a passing fit of illness, the term is applied to other cases of intermittence wholly unconnected with the symptom of shivering, and finally to a passing shower of rain or hail. In the same way Da. gys, shudder, and also shower.
Shred. Du. schroode, schroye, a bit, piece of paper, scrow; schrooder, a tailor; Pl.D. scharden, schraen, to eat, to gnaw as a mouse; G. schrot, what is cut up into fragments, corn coarsely ground, lead cut up for shot; schroten, to shred, cut up. OberD. schreissen, to split; Goth. diskreitan, to tear asunder.
The word differs only in the transposition of the liquid and vowel from shard, sherd, and the radical meaning is a piece rent off, from a representation of the sound of tearing. Gael. sgread, shriek, cry, harsh grating sound; Sc. screed, a loud shrill sound, the sound made in tearing, the act itself of rending, or the piece torn off. Gael. sgraid, sgrait, a shred, rag.
* Shrew.—Shrewd. Shrew was formerly used in the general sense of a bad man. Shrewid generation, prava.—Wiclif, Acts 2. Shreude folke, improbís.—Chaucer, Boeth. 6. II. The primitive sense of the word seems to be shewn in G. schroff, rugged, passing into the notion of harsh, hard, sharp, disagreeable, bad. A shrewd air is a sharp air, a shrewd man, a man of a hard clear judgment. In Hesse the word appears under the form schrô, schrâ, schreff, in the pl. schrowe, shrawe, schrewe, rough to the touch, poor, miserable, bad. Ein schroes pferd, an ill-fed poor horse; ein schroes essen, coarse bad food; ein schrâ maul, a sharp tongue; ein schrower, a shrewd man, one ready of speech and act. Pl.D. schrae weide, bare, scarce pasture; ene schrae tied, a shrewd time, hard times; schrae huus holen, to keep a spare house.
Shrewmouse. AS. screawa, mus araneus cujus morsus occidit. From shrew, wicked, as the bite of the animal was supposed to be fatal, and it was said to lame cattle even by running over them. It must not be confounded with Du. schermuys, G. schormaus, the mole or digging mouse, from scharren, schoren, to scrape, to dig.
The derivation is confirmed by a passage in Higden Polychron. by Trevisa, p. 335, new ed. 'There is grete plente of samon—and of wel schrewed mys.' The Latin text has mures nocentissimos, the other old translation most nyous mys.—Marsh.
Shriek. See Screech.
Shrift. See Shrive.
Shrill. Used by Spenser as a verb. At last they heard a horn that shrilled clear Throughout the wood that echoed again. Sc. skirl, to cry with a shrill voice; a shriek, a shrill cry. N. skryla (of children), to cry in a high note; skraala, to squawl. Pl.D. schrell, harsh, sharp in sound or taste, hoarse. Schrell bier, hard, sour beer; de appel het enen schrellen smakk, the apple has a sharp taste. Shriek and shrill are related to each other as squeak and squeal.
Shrimp. Anything very small of its kind, a small shell-fish. Such things go for wit as long as they are in Latin, but what dismally shrimped things would they appear if turned into English.—Echard in R. Du. krimpen, to contract, diminish. AS. scrymman, to wither or dry up. G. schrumpfen, to shrivel, wrinkle, shrink; Sc. scrimp, to deal sparingly with one; contracted, scanty, deficient. 'He scrimps him in his meat.' Da. skrumpe, to shrivel, shrink; Du. schrompelen, to shrivel, become wrinkled or crumpled. E. dial. shrump, to shrug, to shrink; shrump-shouldered, crump-shouldered, having contracted shoulders. Gr. κράμβος, parched, shrivelled.
The idea of contraction is connected with a vast variety of forms which may be arranged in two parallel series, rup, rump, crup, crump, skrup, skrump, and ruk, runk, cruk, crunk, skruk, shrunk. But whether the foregoing forms have grown from a common root or have arisen independent of each other, or whether the connection between the fact of contraction and the sound by which it is signified is always of precisely the same nature, are questions on which it would be rash to pronounce a decisive opinion. The general course of development would seem to be from the analogy between a broken, rugged sound, and a movement, and thence a shape of similar character, and from the individual contractions of a rugged line or surface to the idea of contraction in general. As examples of the different forms may be cited Lith. rupas, rugged; E. ripple, rimple, the surface of water curled by a breeze; rumple, G. rümpfen, to distort the mouth or nose; Gael, crup, crouch, contract, shrink; E. crump, crimp; Sw. skrumpen, shrivelled, shrunk; and for the series with a terminal k instead of p, N. rukka, Lat. ruga, a wrinkle; E. rugged, Sw. rimka, to shake, vacillate; rynka, wrinkle, rumple; E. crook, crouch, crincle; N. skrukka, a wrinkle; AS. scrincan, to shrink; Sw. skrynka, wrinkle; skrynkia, to crumple, wrinkle.

Shrine. AS. scrin, G. schrein, Fr. escrin, Lat. scrinium, a cabinet or place to keep anything in. See Screen.

To Shrink. To start back, instinctively to withdraw from something painful; then, to contract, to draw in. OFlem. schrincken, contrahere, retrahere.—Kil. It seems to be a nasalised form of the Du. schrikken, to start back, to startle (Bomhoff), the origin of which is explained under Shrug, which is indeed fundamentally synonymous. Florio explains It. raggruzzare, to crinch, shrink or shrug together. 'I drawe together as lether or other thing that shringeth together.'—Palsgr. G. erschrecken, to be alarmed, is properly to start at, to shrink from. Du. een schrikkig paard, a startlish horse. N. skrekka, to shrink as cloth.

To Shrive.—Shrift. To shrive is explained by Bayley, to make confession to a priest, also to hear a confession, and it is generally understood to include the whole circumstances of the transaction, the imposition of penance and consequent absolution. From the latter applications ON. skript is used in the sense of reprimand and of punishment.

The word has been explained from Lat. scribere, to write, on different grounds which will hardly bear examination. According to Skinner, because the names of persons confessing were taken down in writing; according to Ihre, because the penance enjoined was given by the priest in writing. But the name must have arisen at a period when writing materials were too dear, and the knowledge of reading too confined to make it possible that the injunction of penance should with any generality have been delivered in writing. The truth appears to be that there is no direct descent from Lat. scribere, and in order to explain the relation with the Lat. verb we must go back to a meaning which it had anterior to that of writing, viz. the scoring of a line, as shown in the compound præscribere, to prescribe or enjoin, literally, to trace out a line to be followed by the agent in question. 'Culter vocatur, prædensam, priusquam proscindatur, terram secans, futurisque sulcis vestigia præscribens incisuris'—Pliny; where the latter clause may be translated, and marking out beforehand, by the incisions, a track for the future furrows.

From the same original source, but doubtless by no direct descent, is Pl.D. schreve, a line, which is used in the same metaphorical sense as the verbal element in præscribere. Na dem schreve hauen: to cut according to the line chalked out. Aver den schreven gaan: to go beyond the line, to transgress. Thus we are enabled from the internal resources of the language to explain AS. scrifan, ge-scrifan, to trace out a line of action, to ordain, enjoin, assign. Sylle with his life swa hwæt swa him man scrife: he shall give as a ransom for his life whatsoever is laid upon him.—Exod. xxi. 30. Throwige thær swa bisceop him scrife: patiatur ibi sicut episcopus ei imponat. Buton swa gescryfen sy: unless it is in any way enjoined. Edictis, gebennum oththe gescrifum; ahdictis, forscrifenum.—Gl. Cot. in Junius.

To shrive then had reference originally to the injunctions given by the priest on hearing confession, and was only a special application of a word which in its general sense has been lost to the English language.

To Shrivel. Gael, sgreubh, sgreag, dry, parch, shrivel; sgreagan, anything dry, shrunk, or shrivelled. E. dial, shravel, dry faggot wood. Related to OE. rivel, to wrinkle, as Du. schrompelen to E. rumple, or as Sw. skrynka to rynka, to wrinkle.

The word, like so many others connected with the idea of a wrinkled, rugged surface, may be from the mere representation of a broken sound, but in the present case it is probable it has a more specific origin in a form like ON. skráfa, N. skraava, to creak or rustle like dry things. ON. skráthurr, so dry as to make a noise of the foregoing kind. N. skraaen, dried, shrunk; skraana, to dry, shrivel, shrink. Da. dial, skrasle, to rustle; skras, skraasel, very dry. On the same principle, Lith. skribeti, to rustle, crackle; skrebti, to become dry.

Shroud. To shroud, to cover, shelter.—B. Give my nakedness Some shroud to shelter in.—Chapman, Homer.

gan anone so softly as I coude Among the bushes prively me to shroude.
Chaucer, Black Knight.

AS. scrud, garment, clothing. ON. skrud, ornament, clothing; skrudbunn, state-lily clothed; loptlig skrud, the ornaments of the sky, the heavenly bodies. Skryda, to adorn, to clothe.

Shrub. A dwarf tree, also a little sorry fellow.—B. Scrubby, stunted, poor of its kind. Da. dial. skrub, bush, brush-wood. Egeskrub, bögeskrub, an oak or a beech that is stunted in its growth. The scrubs in Australia are growths of brush-wood or stunted trees.

The original meaning would seem to be a roughness, then a prominence, pro-jection, stump, low tree with stiff brushy branches, a stunted growth. Da. skrubbet, rough, rugged. The E. shrub or scrub and scrog correspond to Du. strobbe and struik, Pl.D. struuk, G. strauch, a shrub or bush. Du. stobbe, struik, stronk, G. strumpf, a stump or stalk. Straube, anything with a rough or uneven surface. ' Harte und strûbe Hände wie ein reibisen.'—Schmeller. Bav. strauben, struben, strupen, to stand up stiff, subrigere, in-horrere; strobeln, to be or to make rough, like disordered hair. G. struppig, rugged, standing on end like hair or feathers. A shrub or scrub is a bush with stiff project-ing branches.

Du. strobbelen, strompelen, struikelen, stronkelen, to stumble, are probably not to be understood as striking against a stump, but as plunging, striking irre-gularly out with the feet. Bav. strabeln, strappeln, to move the hands and feet. See Stumble.

* Shrug. The actual meaning is a twitch or convulsive movement, especially of the shoulder, a shuddering, shrinking. Schruggyn, frigulo.—Pr. Pm. ' The touch of the cold water made a pretty kind of shrugging come over her body like the twinkling of the fairest among the fixed stars.'—Arcadia in R. Küttner translates den kopf zucken, to shrink or shrug in order to ward off a blow. Zucke nicht! don't shrug, don't stir in the least. Shrug corresponds to OHG. scrican, screcchan, to start, spring, leap, dash. The syllable scrick, like crack or crick, represents in the first instance a sharp sudden sound, then a sharp quick movement. Sw. dial. skräkka, to give a crack, to move by jerks. Bav. schrick, a sudden sound, a clap of thunder, a crack in a glass vessel. 'Voll der offnen schrick und ritzen.'—Schm. ' Crepuit medium, zerschrick in

SHUN der mitt.' ON. skrugga, thunder; skrykkr, a sudden movement. Med rykkjum ok skrykkjum, with jerks and starts. N. skrukka, a wrinkle, or drawing in of a texture. Parallel forms without the sibi-lant initial are N. rukka, a wrinkle, OE. rug, rog, to tug, wag, shake; ON. rykkja, Da. rykke, to twitch, pluck, tug; Sw. rycka, to pluck or snatch; rycka på axlar-nar, to shrug one's shoulders.

To Shudder. Du. schudden, schuddern, Pl.D. huddern, Du. huggeren, huyveren, to shiver; Pl.D. schüddeln, to shake; schuddern, G. schaudern, schauern, to shudder, shiver. The radical figure is a broken sound, the representation of which is subsequently applied to a broken move-ment. Swiss tschäddem, tschudern, tschi-dern, schädern, to give a cracked sound; tschädderi, a clapper. E. dial. 'shider, to break to shivers; shider, a shiver. Da. dial. skuddre, to shiver. — Molb. in Todde.

To Shuffle. Bav. schufeln, to go along scraping the ground with one's feet. Hesse, schuben, schufeln, to slide, schufel, a slide on the ice. See Scuffle.

To Shun. Properly to shove (in which sense it is still provincially in use), then to shove on one side, to avoid. A Sussex peasant said: ' He kept shunning me off the path.' ' I shonne a danger, I starte asyde whan I se a thynge, Je me guenchys. An I had not shonned asyde he had hit me in the eye.'—Palsgr. So from Du. schuiven, to shove, Fr. esquiver, to slip aside, shun, avoid.

From turning aside from arose the sense of forbearing, sparing.
What wuste I what was wrong or right, What to take or what to schone.
Body and Soul, 341.

Hence may be explained G. schonen, to spare, to abstain from. Er schonete zu nehmen von seinen schafen und rindern: he spared to take of his own flock.

Synonymous with shun, and probably a mere corruption of it, is shunt, a word which, having become obsolete in culti-vated language, has been brought back again by accidental use in the termino-logy of railways. A train is said to shunt when it turns aside to allow another to pass.

Then I drew me down into a dale whereat the dumb deer Did shiver for a shower; but I shunted from a freyke, For I would no wight in the world wist who I were.—Hal.

To shunt is also, as G. verschieben (schieben, to shove), to put off, delay. Schape us an answer and schunte yow no lengere.—Morte Arthure in Hal. To Shut. From Du. schieten, to shoot, cast, drive forwards, is formed schut, something put forwards, a defence, obstacle, hindrance, mound, dike. Schieten een gracht, to dig a ditch. Een schut voor iets schieten, to place an obstacle before a thing, to hinder it. Schut tegen 't vuur, tegen de wind, a screen against the fire or wind. Schutdeur, a sluice gate; schutdak, shed; schuthok, schutkooi, a pound for cattle. Pl.D. schott, a bolt, a sliding door by which water can be kept out. Bav. schütt, a mound. Schutten machen, aggerem facere.—Gl. in Schm. Again from the substantive schutt or schott is formed a secondary verb, Du. schutten, to ward off, turn back, hinder, stop, shut up. Schutten den wind, to keep out the wind, whence schutsel, a window shutter. Slag schutten, to parry a blow. Schutberd, boarding for enclosures. Schutten de beesten, to impound beasts. Pl.D. schotten, schutten, to keep or shut out. Schotte de döre to, bolt the door. Water schotten, to repel the water by a dam. In the latter sense, the Da. uses the primary verb skyde, to shoot; skyde vand, to repel water. Bav. schütten, to fence round, to protect; Sw. skydda, to protect, shelter; G. schützen, to protect, are equivalent forms. Shuttle. Da. væverskytte, N. skutul, skiöt, skyt, the implement by which the thread is shot to and fro in weaving.

Shy. G. scheu, timorous, shunning; scheuen, to be afraid of, to shun; scheuchen, to scare away, to affright; scheuche, vogelscheu, a scarecrow. Du. schouw, timid, wild; schowen, schuwen, to avoid. It. schifare, to loathe or abhor, to shun; schifo, loathsome, also nice, coy. Prov. esquiu, wild, frightened; esquivar, to avoid, refuse. Sp. esquivo, scornful, shy, cold. A natural origin of the word may be found in the interjection of shuddering, schu! schuck! (Grimm, 3, 298), leading to OHG. sciuhan, expavescere, perhorrescere, terrere; kisciuhit, perterritus; liohtskihtig, lucifugus; Pl.D. schuck, horror, fear, avoidance. Ick heffn schuck vaorn aust: I shudder at the thoughts of harvest. He schuckt sick nao hus te gaon: he fears to go to the house. Dat pärt schuckt: the horse shies.—Danneil. G. schüchtern, shy, timorous. And this I believe is the true explanation of the word, although a different origin would seem to be indicated by Sw. skygg, timid, fearful, shy, wild; skygga, to take fright, to turn aside; which seem derived from skugg, shade, shadow, making the original signification, starting at a shadow, a figure very generally used to express the idea of taking fright. Sw. wara rädd för sin egen skugga, to be afraid of one's own shadow, to be fearful; Bret. skeud, shadow; lammout rag he skeud, to start at his shadow, to be afraid. So also, W. ysgod, shadow; ysgodigo, to take fright as a horse—Richards; Sp. sombra, shadow; asombrar, to overshadow, to take fright as a horse, to terrify, amaze; Fr. ombrage, shade; ombrageux, jealous, suspicious; cheval ombrageux, a shying horse; Gr. σκιά, shadow; Mod.Gr. σκιάζω, to shade, to terrify; σκιάζομαι, to be afraid.

Sib. Related, of kin; preserved in gossip (God-sib), related in God, i. e. by the ordinance of baptism. Goth. sibja, relationship; OHG. sibba, sippia, affinity, peace; ON. sifi, relation, friend; AS. sib, peace, alliance, kindred, companionship.

Sick. AS. seoc, G. siech, ON. siukr, Goth. siuks, sick; G. siechen, to be sickly, to languish. Connected by Diefenbach with the notion of drying up, fading away. Lett. sukt, to fade away; Pol. suchy, dry; suchota, dryness, leanness; suchoty (pl.), consumption. Russ. sochnuty, to fade away, dry up. Bret. seach, dry; siochan, feeble, delicate, tender. A more probable derivation may be drawn from the sighing and moaning of a sick person. Pl.D. sucht signifies both sigh (and thence longing, strong desire), and also sickness. G. sucht, an immoderate longing for a thing, sickness. Ehrsucht, geldsucht, zanksucht, a longing for or devotion to honour, money, broils; gelbsucht, jaundice. E. love-sick and love-longing are equivalent terms. Du. suchten, to sigh, groan, languish. Gael. acain, sigh, sob, moan; acaineach, wailing, sickly. Da. hive, to pant or gasp, also to languish in sickness. Han har længe hivet, he has long been ailing.

Sickle. AS. sicel, Du. sekel, seckel, OHG. sihhila, G. sichel, Lat. secula, a sickle or scythe, from seco, to cut.

-side, -sidence. Lat. sedeo, sessum, to sit; sido, sedi, sessum, to seat oneself, to sit down, settle; whence Reside, Subside, &c. In like manner are related Gr. ἕζομαι, to seat oneself, sit, and ἵζω, to seat, place, sit, ἱζάνω, to settle down.

Side. 1. ON. sida, G. seite, a side. 2. Long, as 'my coat is very side.'—B. AS. sid, ample, spacious, vast; ON. síðr, long, loose. Síðr hár, flowing hair; síðeyrðr, long-eared; síðd, length of garment.
Sidereal. Lat. sidus, -eris, a star, constellation.
Siege. Fr. siége, It. sedia, seggia, a seat or sitting; assedio, Lat. obsidium, the sitting down before a town in a hostile way. See -side.
Sieve.—Sift. AS. sife, Pl.D. seve, Du. zeef, zijghe, G. sieb, a sieve; siften, sichten, Du. sijghen, Dan. sigte, to sift. The name may probably be taken from the implement having originally been made of sedge or rushes. ON. sif, Dan. siv, sedge, rush. 'Sieves were made of flax-string, but many of a more common quality were made of thin rushes, and that they were originally of this simple material is evident from the sieve being represented in the hieroglyphics as composed of rushes.'—Wilkinson, Ancient Egyptians.
The probability of the foregoing derivation is supported by W. hesg, sedge; hesgyn, a sieve; Pol. sit, a rush; sito, a sieve. On the other hand, the name might naturally be derived from Dan. sive, N. siga, to ooze as water, to fall by its own weight, to sink; Du. zijgen, zijpen, to trickle, drip, strain; N. sia, sila, to filter, to strain. Boh. prosýwati, to sift, to strain through a sieve; prosýwadlo, a sieve. Da. sie, to strain; si, a strainer, filter. See Sile.
Sigh. AS. sican, siccettan, E. dial. sike, Sw. sucka, W. igio, to sigh, sob; AS. seofian, to mourn; E. dial. to sife, siff, to sigh; G. seufzen, Pl.D. suchten, suften, to sigh. Da. hîge, hie, hîve, to pant, gasp. Sc. souch, swooch, the sound of the wind, or of one breathing heavily in sleep, a deep sigh; souch, souf, to sound as the wind, to breathe deep as in sleep. All directly imitative.
Sign. —Sign. — Signal. — Signify. Lat. signum, a mark, sign; whence significare, to make a sign, to signify; signaculum, a seal; OFr. seignal, signacle, a seal, mark, signal. To Consign, Resign, &c.
To Sile.—Silt. To sile, to drip, to ooze through, sink down, to fall; siling dish, a milk-strainer; silt, sediment, ooze.
And then syghande he saide with sylande terys. Morte Arthure.
Many balde gart he sile With the dynt of his spere.—MS. Hal.
Sw. sila, to strain, filter; sila sig fram, to percolate or ooze through. Pl.D. silen, to drain off water.

The immediate origin is the form exemplified in N. siga, Du. zijgen, doorzijgen. Da. sie, to strain, percolate, sink in; G. versiegen, to drain or dry up; N. sika, to strain or drain off moisture, whence the frequentatives sikla, to trickle, also (as Da. sagle) to drivel; sila, to drip, to strain; silla, to drip fast; G. sickern, siekern, to trickle, leak, percolate.
As in so many similar cases, a parallel form is found with a terminal labial instead of guttural in the radical syllable. Du. door zijpen, doorzijpelen, to drip or trickle through; Pl.D. sipen, sipern, to ooze, drip; sipeln, sippern, to let tears trickle.
The ultimate origin is to be found in the notion of sucking or supping up, then sinking into the cracks of the vessel or walls in which the liquid is contained. See To Sag.
Silence. Goth. silan, Lat. sileo, Gr. σιγάω, to be silent. In all probability from hushing or commanding silence by a hiss. Gr. σίζω, to hiss, to cry sh! to hush. The interjection commanding silence is in Turk. süsd! Ossetic ss! sos! Fernandian sia! Yoruba sio!—Tylor.
Silk. Lith. szilkai, silk; silkai, cotton. From Gr. σηρικόν, Lat. sericum, the produce of the Seres, by the conversion of the r into l.
The first people of any knowledge and acquaintance be the Seres, famous for the fine silke that their woods do yeeld.—Holland, Pliny.
* Sill. The threshold of a door or window. Pl.D. sull, G. schwelle, Fr. seuil, It. soglia, a threshold. Sw. syll, Dan. syld, base of a framework, building, ground-sill. NE. siles, the main timbers of a house; soil, rafter, window-sill.—Hal. Fr. solive, a beam.
Sole signifies in general the foundation, or that on which a thing rests. W. swl, a flat place, ground, soil; Bret. sol, soil, area, floor of a house; foundation, base, bottom; sole of a shoe, beam. W. sail, syl, a groundwork, foundation, base; seilddar (daear, earth, ground), a foundation, pile, or prop; seilfaen, sylfaen, foundation stone; seilddor, door-sill, threshold; gosail, an underpinning or ground silling, foundation; goseilio, to underpin, to prop. Gael. sail, a beam; sailbhunn (bonn, sole, foundation, base), the sole, lower beam of a partition.
Sillabub. A frothy food to be slapped or slubbered up, prepared by milking from the cow into a vessel containing wine or spirits, spice, &c.

And we will ga to the dawnes and slubber up a sillabub.—Two Lancashire Lovers in Hal.
The word is a corruption of slap-up or slub-up (like Fr. salope, from Swab. schlapp, a slut), and is the exact equiva-lent of Pl.D. slabb'ut, Swiss schlabutz, watery food, spoon-meat, explained by Stalder as schlabb uus, from schlappen, slabben, to slap, lap or sup up food with a certain noise. Schlabbete, schlappete, weak soup.—Stalder. Mantuan, slappar, to devour. To slap up, to eat quickly, to lick up food.—Hal. ON. slupra. Da. slubre, Pl.D. slubbern, to sup up soft food with a noise represented by the sound of the word. On the same prin-ciple are formed E. dial. slubber, anything of a gelatinous consistency, the spawn of toads or frogs ; slub, wet and loose mud.—Hal. Du. slemp [sillabub], a certain drink made of milk, sugar, &c. (Bomhoff), is derived in like manner from slempen, Bav. slampen, to lap, sup up, junket.

Silly. AS. sælig, G. selig, blessed, happy.
O God (quod she) so worldly selinesse, Whiche clerkes callen false felicitie, Ymedled is with many bitternesse.
Chaucer, Tro. and Cress.
It is probably from the union in an infant of the types of happiness or unalloyed enjoyment, innocence, and inexperience, that we must explain the train of thought in the present word. It is constantly used by the older writers in the sense of simple, unknowing.
Thus craftily hath she him besette With her lime roddes, and panter and snare, The selie soul ycaught hath in her nette, Of her sugred mouth alas! nothing ware.
Ch., Remedy of Love.
The simplicity of a child carried on into later life implies deficiency of understand-ing, and thus simpleton or innocent be-come synonymous for an idiot or fool. The French say, que vous êtes bon enfant, what an innocent you are! N. Fris. salig, half saved, weak in mind. The same train of thought is seen in Gr. εὐήθης, good-hearted, simple-minded, then silly, in Fr. benêt, a simpleton, from bene-dictus, blessed, or in Boh. blazen, a fool, from blaziti, to bless.
The primary origin of the word is probably shown in Manx shilloo, a herd of cattle ; Gael, sealbh, cattle, posses-sions, good fortune ; sealbhmhor, having great possessions ; sealbhach, prosper-ous, fortunate. In the same way AS. ead, a possession ; eadig, rich, happy, blessed.

Silvan. Lat. sylva or silva, a wood.

Silver. Goth, silubr, Slav, srebro, Lith. sidabras.
Similar.—Similitude. Lat. similis, like ; similaris, of like nature ; similitudo, likeness. Goth, sama, same ; samaleiks, samelike, agreeing together ; samaleiko, equally, likewise.

To Simmer. Imitative of the gentle hissing or murmuring of liquids beginning to boil. 'I symper as licours on the fyre byfore it bygynneth to boyle—'—Palsgr. The cream of simpering milk.—Fl. Comp. Du. sissen, to fizz as water on hot iron; to simmer.—Bomhoff. Pol. szemrać, to murmur, ripple, rustle. Turk, zemzemé, soft murmur of voices. In the name of the fountain zemzem at Mecca the same root represents the purling of water.

Simony. The crime of Simon Magus, selling spiritual things for money.

* To Simper. To smile in a restrained affected manner, to put on an air of mo-desty.
With a made countenance about her mouth between simpering and smiling, her head bowed somewhat down, she seemed to languish with overmuch idleness.—Sidney, Arcadia.
Swiss zimpfer thun, to behave in an over-bashful way, to affect propriety, to eat, drink in an overdelicate way ; zimpfer-len, to mince, to be prudish, overdelicate ; zimpferli, zimpertrili, a girl of affected sensibility, as OE. simperdecocket, a nice thing.—Cot. Bav. zimpern, zimpeln, to behave in an affected, delicate, nice way. Swab, zumpfer, zemper, bashful, affected, nice in eating; zimperknickele, an affected person. Sw. sipp, simp, sem-per, affectedly moderate in eating.—Ihre. Da. dial, semper, simper, affected, coy, prudish, especially of one who requires pressing to eat ; 'She is as semper as a bride.' The radical meaning is probably the same as that of E. prim, signifying a conscious restraint of the lips and mouth, as if closing them in the pronunciation of the word sipp. 'Sipp,' says the Brem. Wtb., 'expresses the gesture of a com-pressed mouth, and an affected pronun-ciation with pointed lips. A woman who makes this sort of megrims is called Miss Sipp or Madam van Sippkels. Of such a one they say. She cannot say Sipp. Den mund sipp trekken, to screw up the mouth. De bruut sitt so sipp, the bride sits so prim.' See Prim.

Simple. Lat. simplex, single, without pretence. Ihre compares semel, once ; semita, a footpath, path for a single per-son ; singulus, each by himself, single.

referring them to the possessive pronoun sin, suus. See Se-.
Simulate. Lat. simulare, to feign. See -semble.
Simultaneous. Lat. simul, together, all at once. Fin. sama, the same ; in the adessitive case, samalla, at the same moment, together ; samalla muotoa, in the same manner.
Sin. G. sünde, OHG. sunta, ON. synd. The radical meaning is probably breach. N. sund, synd'e, sundered, injured, broken ; i sund, in pieces, asunder ; eit sundt glas, a broken glass ; sunde klæde, torn clothes. N. synd is used not only for sin or guilt towards God, but breach of right in general. Hava synd fyr' ein, to reproach one with his misconduct ; gjera synd paa ein, to deal hardly with one, do him injustice ; syndapeng, money unjustly extorted. OHG. sunta, peccatum, culpa, noxa, macula ; ano sunta, sine macula ; suntiga, noxii (corpora) ; Lat. sons, sontis, guilty, hurtful ; insons, OHG. unsuntig, innocent.
Since. AS. sith, late, and as an adv. lately, afterwards ; sithmæst, sithest, last ; siththan, siththen, after, after that, thenceforth, since. OE. seththe, sith, sithen, sin, sithence, Sc. syne.
And he axide his fadir how long is it sithe this hath falle to him ?—Wiclif, Mark 9.
For sithen the fadris dieden.—2 Peter 3.
O mighty God, if that it be thy will, Sin thou art righteous judge, how may it be, &c. Man of Laws T.
From consequence in time since is transferred to consequence in reasoning and causation. In accordance with, or in dependence on the fact that thou art righteous judge, how may it be, &c. ON. síd, sídar, sídast, o. late, later, at last ; um sídir (acc. pl.). Da. omsider, at last, at length. ON. fyrr og síder, from beginning to end. Pl.D. seder, sedert, sinter, sint. Du. sedert, sinds, G. seit, since.
Sincere. Lat. sincerus, apparently a compound of the same element which gives the sim in simplex, and Pol. szczery, pure, unmixed, genuine, sincere, true. AS. sin (in comp.), ever, always ; G. singrün, E. sengreen (evergreen), a plant ; OHG. sinvluot, G. sundfluth, the great flood.
Sinew. AS. sinu, Du. zenuw, G. sehne, ON. sin, sinew.
To Sing. Goth. siggvan, to sing, to read aloud. Gael. seinn, ring as a bell, play on an instrument, sing, chant, proclaim. Sanscr. chinj, ring, tingle. ON. sangra, to murmur ; N. sangra, to whine, give a long-drawn whining sound ; singla, singre, to clink.
To Singe. Du. senghen, senghelen, to burn superficially ; de gesengde luchtstreek, the torrid zone. Derived by Adelung from a representation of the sound of blazing. ON. sangra, to murmur ; sangr, having a burnt taste.
Single. — Singular. Lat. singulus, singularis.
Sinister. Lat. sinister, on the left hand, unlucky.
To Sink. Goth. siggquan, ON. sökkva, G. sinken, Sw. sjunka, to fall to the bottom ; Goth. saggquan, G. sänken, Sw. sänka, to cause to sink. It is not easy to separate the present form from the series mentioned under Sag, where the radical notion is the wasting or soaking in of water through the pores and interstices of the basin in which it is held, then the lowering of the surface, the fact of gradually lowering or sinking down. Lith. seku, senku, to dry up, drain away, become shallow ; sunkus, heavy ; AS. sigan, to sink down, fall, set as the sun ; N. siga, to ooze or trickle through, to sink slowly, become imperceptibly lower, to fall gradually down by its own weight.
In accordance with the original meaning, to sink was used in the sense of pouring away liquids, and the word is still used in the sense of a drain or place where slops are poured away.
In the lordys cup that levys undrynken. Into the almes dische hit schall be sonken. Book of Curtasy, Percy Soc. vol. iv.
The bailiff that had the charge of the publick sinkes vaulted under the ground dealt with Scaurus for good security.—Holland, Pliny in R.
In the same way Du. siipen, to trickle, drip, ooze ; siipe, a drain or sink.—Kil.
Sinuous. Lat. sinus, a bosom, a bay.
Sip. A related form with sap, sop, sup, all representing the sound of a mixture of air and water, as in the act of sucking up liquids or of agitation in a confined space. Du. sop, soppe, juice, sauce ; sope, suype, a draught of liquid ; suypen, G. saufen, to sup up, to drink deep ; Du. sippen, to sip or take small draughts.
A sippet is a small piece of bread sopped in sauce. Skelton uses it for a sip.
And ye will geve me a sippet Of your stale ale.—Elinor Rummyng.
Gr. σίφων, a reed or tube used to suck or sip wine out of the cask.
Siphon. Gr. σίφων, a tube.
Sir.—Sire. It. Ser, Sere, a title given to Doctors, Priests, Clerks, &c., and to

Knights, as we say, Sir; Ser buono, Goodman Sir; Ser bello, fair Sir. Messere, my Sir; also a master.—Fl. Fr. Sire, Sir or master; a title of honour which without addition is given only to the King, but with addition unto merchants or tradesmen (Sire Pierre, &c.), and unto knights (Sire chevalier), and unto some few owners of fiefs or seigniories.—Cot.

The question has been raised whether the word is a contraction of Signore, Seigneur, or whether it is an adoption of Mod.Gr. Κύρ, Sir, master, from Κύριος, Lord. But signor and seigneur readily pass into sior (used colloquially for Sir in the N. of Italy), and sieur, sire, and seigneur were used indifferently by the early writers. 'Messires Nicolas Pol, qui peres Monseigneur Marc estoit, et Messires Mafo, qui freres Messires Nicolas estoit.'—Marco Polo, ch. i, from Marsh. The old Catalan form is Mossen.

Siren. Lat. siren, from Gr. Σειρήν.
Sirloin. Properly surloin, as it is written in an account of expenses of the Ironmongers' Company, temp. H. VI.: 'A surloyn beeff, vii.d.'—Athenæum, Decr. 28, 1867. Fr. surlonge, terme de boucherie; superlumbare.—Trevoux.
Sirname. Fr. surnom, It. sopranome, additional name.
Sirocco. Sp. xirque, Ptg. xaroco, S.E. wind, from Arab. charqut, adj. of charq, the East.
Sirreverence. From salvâ reverentiâ, save your reverence, sa' reverence, an introductory excuse made when anything indecorous has to be mentioned.
Neither would common fame report these horrid things of them, not to be uttered without a preface of honour to the hearer.—Minucius Felix by James, 29.
At which the lawyer taking great offence Said, Sir, you might have used save reverence.—Harrington.
The beastliest man; why, what a grief must this be (Sir-reverence of the company) a rank whoremaster.—Massinger in Nares.
Siserara. Corruption of certiorari, the name of a legal writ by which a proceeding is moved to a higher court.
They cannot so much as pray, but in law, that their sins may be removed with a writ of error, and their souls fetched up to heaven with a sasarara.—O. Play in N.
Siskin. A small singing bird of a yellowish hue. Du. siisken, cüsken, G. zeisig, Pol. czyz, a goldfinch, greenfinch; Sw. siska, siskin. Du. sissen, to twitter like small birds.
-sist. Lat. sisto, to place, stay stationary. As in Consist, Insist.
Sister. Goth. swistar, Pol. siostra, Lith. sesseré, Esthon. sossar. Fin. sisa, Sanscr. swasri, sodari, Lat. soror, W. chwaer, Gael. piuthar.
To Sit. See Set.
Site.—Situate. Lat. situs, -a, -um, set, placed, buried; situs, -ûs. It. sito, Fr. sit, the setting or standing of a place, a situation. According to the form of the word, situs should be the pple. of sino, situm, to permit, let be, suffer, but the sense is as if it came from sido, sessum, to set down.
Sithe. ON. sigð, a sickle, a sword; Pl.D. seged, segd, seed, seid, a kind of sickle or billhook for cutting turf. Lat. securis. Boh. sekera, an axe. From the verbal root exemplified in Lat. seco, Welsh, ssecu, sseczu, to cut; Bohem. sekati, to cut, hew, strike with a rod, sword, &c., whence sekac, a mower. Pol. siekać, to chop, hack, mince. ON. sax, a knife, or short sword; saxa, to chop, to strike.
Six. Lat. sex, Gr. ἕξ, Goth. saihs. Boh. ssest, W. chwe'ch, Heb. schesch, Sanscr. shash, Gael. sé.
Size. I. From Lat. sedere, to sit, descended It. assidere, Prov. assezer, assire, assir, Fr. asseoir, to seat, set, place, fix, and thence It. assisa, Prov. asisa, Fr. assise, a sitting, setting down, settlement, arrangement. It. assisa, a settled fashion, the arrangement of a tax, and thence the tax itself. All' assisa, according to the fashion. Prov. asiza, state, condition, manner. 'Per mostrar noel asiza, so es noela maniera:' to show a new assize, that is, a new manner.—Raynouard. E. assize, and corruptly size, was the settlement or arrangement of the plan on which anything was to be done. The assize of bread or of fuel was the ordinance for the sale of bread or of fuel, laying down price, weight, length, thickness, &c. 'Tis not in thee To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train, To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes.—Lear.—i. e. to curtail my allowances.
There was a statute for dispersing the standard of the exchequer throughout England, thereby to size [regulate] weights and measures.—Bacon, H. VII.
The term was then applied to the specific dimensions laid down in the regulation, and finally to dimensions of magnitude in general. The measure described by Rastall as an act for the assize of fuel is mentioned by Fabyan in the following terms: Also this year was an act of parliament for wood and coal, to keep the full size [the regulated construction of the faggots, &c.] after the Purifi- cation of our Lady—that no man shall sell of any other size upon pain of forfeiture.

2. A second meaning, apparently very different from the former one, is a kind of glue used to give coherence to the coat laid on in colouring walls or to stiffen paper. It. assisa, sisa, a kind of glue that painters use. — Fl. The original meaning seems to be a laying on, a coat of plastic material laid on for gilding, then the viscous ingredient used to give coherence to the coating. Fr. assiette is often used synonymous with assise, and both forms are used in the sense of a couch or layer of stones or bricks in building, while assiette a dorer is gold size.—Cot.

Skate. Lat. squatus, squatina, ON. skata, perhaps from its pointed tail. N. skat, top of a tree, properly point; skata, to become smaller at the end, to run to a point. Da. skata att, it runs to a point behind. Skaten, narrow at the end.

Skein. Fr. escaigne, W. cainc, ysgainc, a branch; ysgainc o edaf, a skein of thread; rhaff dair cainc, a rope of three yarns; cainc o gerdd, a tune in music; cainc o for, an arm of the sea. Gael. sgeinnidh, flax or hemp, thread, twine; sgeinn, sgeinnidh, a skein.

Skellum. A rogue. Du. schelm, a carcase, carrion, dead animal; a plague, pest, pestilent fellow; schelmshals, a villain; schelmstuk, a piece of wickedness. G. schelm, a rogue. OHG. scelmo, scalmo, pestilence.

Sketch. Fr. esquisse, It. schizzo, from schizzare, to squirt or spirt, to dash or dabble with dirt or mire, to blur or blot, also to delineate the first rough draught of any work, as of painting or writing. Schizzata, a spitting, a dashing with dirt, blurring with ink, any rough draught.— Fl.

The proper meaning of the word is something dashed off or jotted down upon paper; a mere blotting of paper. So from Du. kladde, a blot, patch of dirt, kladden, to blot, to dirt, also to scribble; Pl.D. kladde, the rough draught or sketch of a writing.

Skew. G. schief, Du. scheef, ON. skeifr. Da. skiæv, oblique, wry; skiæve, to slant, to swerve or deviate. The radical meaning seems to be something shoved or thrust out of the straight line, as wry is what is writhed or twisted aside. G. schieben, to shove; sich schieben, to be displaced or awry, to be removed out of its horizontal situation sideward—Küttn.; verschieben, to put out of its place, to disorder. Eure Perücke ist verschoben, sits quite awry. OberD. schiebicht, awry. Gr. σκαῖος, Lat. scævus, left.

In the same way E. shun, to shove, to turn aside, seems connected with Du. schuyn, oblique, E. dial. aswyn, awry.

Skewer. In Devonshire called a skiver, probably identical with shive or shiver, a splinter of wood. Da. skiæve, Pl.D. scheve, a bit of straw or of the stalk of hemp or flax. E. dial. skeg, stump of a branch, peg of wood.

Skid. A piece of wood on which heavy weights are made to slide; a sliding wedge to stop the wheel of a carriage. To skid the wheel is then applied to any mode of locking the wheel; skid-pan, an iron shoe used for that purpose. The word signifies a shide or billet of wood. G. scheit, a splinter, fragment, piece of cleft wood. ON. skíðí, a billet of wood, a snow-shoe, consisting of thin boards fastened to the feet; skíðgarðr, a fence of cleft wood. See Shide.

Skiff. Fr. esquif. It. schiffo, scaffo, Lat. scapha, a boat.

Skill. The radical sense is separation, then difference, distinction, discernment, reason, intellectual or manual ability. ON. skil, separation, distinction, discrimination. Sjá skil handa sína, to know his right hand from his left. Kunna skil eines, to know the rights of a thing, to understand it. Göra skil, to do what is right and just. Skilja, to separate, distribute, arrange. Vér skildum ljós frá myrkri, we parted light from darkness. Da. skille, to sever, put asunder; adskille, to sever, divide, distinguish, discriminate. Skiel, separation, boundary, discernment. Han veed intet skiel til det han siger, he has no grounds, no reason for what he says; ret og skiel, right and justice; skiellig, reasonable.

In like manner Joon the apostle for humbleness in his epistle, for the same setteth not his name thereto [for the same reason].—Wiclif.

See Scale, Shall.

Skillet.— Skellet. A small vessel with feet for boiling.—B. Fr. escuellette, a little dish (Cot.), designates an object of a somewhat different kind. The skillet is a metal vessel, and is apparently from the resemblance in shape and material to a mule-bell. It. squilla, a little bell, from squillare, to [squeal] ring, clink, squeak, shrill, to sound shrill and clear.—Fl. G.

schellen, to ring ; schelle, a small bell. Lang. esquile, esquileto, a mule-bell. 'Si quis skellam de caballis furaverit.'—Leg. Sal. in Duc. 'Skeletta, in old Latin records, a little bell for a church steeple, whence our vessels called skillets, usually made of bellmetal.'—Philip's New World of Words, 1706.

To Skim. To take off the scum, thence to move lightly over the surface of a liquid.

To Skime. To look asquint.—B. ON. skima, to glance around, to look out furtively ; skima, a glimpse, gleam. AS. sciman, to glitter, to be dazzled, weak-eyed ; me scimiath, lippus sum. Swiss schimer, specious, showy.

From shimmer, to glitter, to shine intermittently or feebly, and not vice versa, the frequentative being usually the original form in these imitative words. So we have shive and shide, a fragment, splinter, from shiver and shider.

Skin. Du. schinde, scheene, skin, bark, peel ; schinden, to skin. ODu. schin, scurf. ON. skinn, skin, fur. W. cenn, skin, peel, scales ; cenn y coed, the moss of trees ; ysgen, scurf. Bret. kenn (in comp.), skin, leather. Bugenn, neat's leather ; talgenn, band worn across the forehead. Kenn, scurf, dross of metals.

Skink. AS. scenc, drink, a drinking cup ; scencan, to skink or serve with drink. Du. schencken, to pour out, serve with wine, give to drink ; schencker, a skinker or drawer, one who serves with drink. G. schenken, to pour out of a larger vessel into a smaller ; schenke, a place where liquids and even other wares are retailed. Sw. skanka, to pour out wine, &c. ; skanksven, Fr. échanson, a cup-bearer.

Skip. To leap. W. cip, a sudden snatch or effort ; ysgip, a quick snatch. Gael. sgiab, start or move suddenly, snatch at. To skip is to move with a sudden start.

Thanne shal your soule up into heven skippe Swifter than doth an arrow of a bow. Merchant's Tale.

If one read skippingly and by snatches. Howel in R.

See Jib.

Skipper. Du. schipper, a sailor ; Gael. sgioba, ship's company, a company associated for any purpose ; sgiobair, ship-master or pilot.

To Skir. To glide or move quickly.—B. To graze, skim, or touch lightly.—Hal. Send out moe horses, skirre the country round. Macbeth.

SKULL Pl.D. schurren is said of anything that makes a noise by rubbing along the ground ; to slide over the ground with a rustling noise ; especially to shuffle along with the feet. If the noise is clearer the term is schirren. Wat schurret da ? whence comes that scraping noise ? Af schurren, to scuttle away. Vorbi schurren, to slide by. G. scharren, to scrape with the feet. To shurl, to slide on the ice.—Grose.

Skirmish. A small encounter of a few men when they fight in confusion without observing order.—B. OE. scarmish, Fr. escarmouche, G. scharmützel. The word has no relation to Fr. escrimer, to fence, to which it is often referred. It properly signifies a row or uproar, from a representation of the noise of people fighting, as. hream, clamour, outcry ; Bret. garm, clamour, battlecry ; W. garm, ysgarm, shout, bawling, outcry ; ysgarmes, outcry, also a skirmish, bickering.

Gael. gairm, call, crow like a cock ; sgairn, howling of dogs or wolves ; sgairneach, crying aloud, shouting, howling.

Skirt. See Shirt.

Skit. An oblique taunt, something cast in one's teeth like a splash of dirt. Sc. skite, to eject any liquid forcibly, to squirt, to throw the spittle violently through the teeth. It. schizzare, to squirt, to dash or dabble with dirt or mire, to blur or blot.

The same metaphor is seen in E. dial. slart, to splash with dirt, to taunt by insinuations—Hal. ; ON. sletta, a splash or spot, a slur ; sletta, to dash (properly something liquid), spargere, projicere ; sletta i nasir, to have a skit at one.

Skittish. Humoursome, fantastical, frisking.—B. It. schizzinoso, peevish, self-weening, skittish, froward, from schizzare, schizzinare, to frisk or spirt and leap as wine doth being poured into a cup, to spin, spirt, gush forth violently.—Fl. The effervescence of youthful spirits is a common metaphor.

Skull. I. Da. skal, shell ; hierneskal, brain-pan, skull. Sw. skal, shell ; skalle, hufwud skalle, skull, pate, noddle. ON. skál, bowl, scale ; hiarnskál, the skull. If skull be radically identical with ON. skál, Da. skaal, Sw. skull, skoll, OE. schal, a bowl or drinking-cup, it is not, as Jamieson suggests, because our barbarous ancestors used the skulls of men for such a purpose, but from the resemblance of the skull to a drinking bowl, the earliest contrivance for which would be a shell of some kind, of a gourd, a cocoa-nut, or shell-fish. It. cocuzza, a gourd; cocuz-zolo, the crown of the head; zucca, a gourd, also a kind of round drinking-glass; by met. a man's head, pate, or nob.—Fl. We have seen that mazzard, the head, is probably from mazer, a bowl.
In flakoun and in skull They skink the wyne.—D. V. 210. 7.
Servanz war at thes bridale, That birled win in cupp and schal.
Small, Metrical Hom. 120.
2. A small oar. See Scull.
3. A skull of herrings. See Shoal.
Sky. Properly a cloud, then the clouds, the vault of heaven. So G. wolke, a cloud, compared with E. welkin, the sky.
And let a certaine winde go That blewe so hidously and hie That it ne lefte not a skie In all the welkin long and brode.
Chaucer, House of Fame.
In the same way Sw. sky, a cloud; skyn (in the definite form), the sky, heaven.
Om skyn falle ned, if the sky should fall.
Ropa til skyn, to call to heaven, to call upon God. ON. sky, cloud; skylaus, evi-dent; til skyia, up in the sky.
Probably the word may be connected with Sw. skugga, AS. scuma, scua, Du. schaede, schaeye, Gr. σκία, shadow, shade.
My fader than lukand furth throw the sky (umbra) Cryis on me fast, Fie son, fie son in hye.
Slab. 1.—Slabber. — Slobber. The sound of dabbling in the wet, of the movement of the air and liquid in a con-fined space, of supping or drawing up liquid into the mouth, is represented by the forms slabber, slobber, slubber, or the syllables slab, slap, slop.
We may cite G. schlabbern, to slabber one's clothes, to sputter in speaking, schlabberig, schlabbig, sloppy, plashy, dirty; Swiss schlabbete, schlappete, watery drink, broth, &c. Pl.D. slabbern (of ducks), to make a noise with the bill in seeking their food in water, to slobber, to spill liquid food in eating; Du. slabberen, slabben, to slap up liquids, to slobber. E. slabber is sometimes used in the sense of splashing only.
Till neare unto the haven where Sandwich stands We were enclosed in most dangerous sands, There were we soused and slabbered, washed and dashed.—Taylor in Hal.
His hosen— Al beslombred in fen as he the plow folwede.
P. P. 1. 430, Skeat.
Pl.D. slabben, to lap like a dog, to make a noise in supping up liquids (Danneil); N. slabba, to dabble, dirty, spill; E. dial. slab, a puddle or wet place; slabby, sloppy, dirty; Gael. slaib, mud, ooze. E. dial. slub, wet and loose mud (Hal.), thick mire in which there is danger of sticking fast.—Forby. Here we see that the same term is used to express two opposite kinds of consistency, wet and loose, or stiff and thick. In the one case the mud is compared with solid ground, and in the other with water, and on this principle it is that slab has sometimes the sense of thick, stiff.
Make the gruel thick and slab.—Macbeth.
* Slab. 2. A slab or thick unhewn piece of wood or stone, must be explained from Lang. esclapa, to split wood; bos esclapa, split logs; esclapo, grand quartier de bois, éclat de moellon brut, a slab of wood or stone. Esclapa is a parallel form with esclata, to crack, Fr. éclater, to burst, split. See Slate.
Slack.—To Slake. ON. slak, Flem. slack, G. schlapp, schlaff, Da. slap, not tight, flapping, loose; N. slekkja, to make slack, and figuratively, to slake, to diminish the active force of anything, to still pain or thirst, to quench the fire, to deaden, to put out. N. slokkjen, extin-guished; slokna, to go out, to faint.
The sound of the flapping of a loose sheet or of dabbling in liquids is repre-sented equally well by a final b or p as by g or k, and hence the syllables flab, flap, flag, flak, slab, slap, slag, slak, with the usual modifications, are found in innu-merable instances expressing the idea of a wet or loose condition, the absence of tension or inherent strength. Pl.D. slakkern (of the weather), to be sloppy, to rain continuously, to dabble in the wet and dirt, to slobber or slop one's food about, to wabble or waver; slakkerig, sloppy, wet; slikk, mud, ooze. Sc. slaukie, slaupie, flaccid, flabby, inactive, slovenly. Pol. slaby, faint, weak, feeble.
Sc. slack, a depression in the ground or a gap between hills, may be explained by N. slakkje, slackness, a slack place in a tissue, where the surface would swag down.
To Slade. To drag along the ground; slade, a sledge or carriage without wheels for dragging weights along. ON. slada, to trail; sladar, the train of a gown. slodi, what is sladed or dragged along, a brush harrow. Gael. slaod, trail along the ground.
The idea of dragging along the ground is probably connected with the figure of a rope which when hanging slack trails along the ground, while when hauled tight it is suspended in the air. Thus from Du. slap, slack, is formed slepen, G. schleppen, to drag, to trail, to carry on a sledge, and in the same way Gael, slaod, to trail, may perhaps be explained from Du. slodderen, to flap or hang loose; Du. sladde (what hangs loose), a rag or tatter. See To Slur.

Slag. G. schlacke, Sw. slagg, scoria, dross of metals; slaggsump, the pit into which the slag runs from a furnace. When minerals are smelted in a furnace the melted metal sinks to the bottom, and the slag or vitrified dross is allowed to run off from the surface like slaver drivel-ling from an infant's mouth. N. slagg, slaver, spittle; slagga, to drivel, to spill or flow over the sides of a vessel.

The word is connected with many similar forms derived from a representation of the sound made by the agitation of liquids or masses of wet. Sw. slagg, slush, a mixture of snow and water; Pl.D. slakk, so much of a slabby material as one takes up at once in a shovel or large spoon and flings down anywhere.—Brem. Wtb. Sc. slag, a quantity of any soft substance lifted from the rest, as a slag of porridge, a large spoonful. Slag, miry and slippery.—Pr. Pm.

To Slam. To shut or to fling down with a bang. Lap. slam, noise; nialme slam, the noise of the mouth, words. Uksa slamketi, the door was slammed, was shut with violence. Sw. slamra, to jingle, clatter, chatter. It. schiamo, schia-mano, uproar, noise.

Slammacking. To slammack, to walk slovenly, to do anything awkwardly; slammocks, slammerkin, slamkin, an awkward waddling person, a sloven.

The sound of dabbling in the wet or of the flapping of loose clothes is represented by the syllables slab or slap, slamp, slam. Du. slap, slack, loose, weak; slabbakken, to go slackly to work, to loiter; slabbakke, a loitering woman. Pl.D. verslabben, slampn, slampampn, to neglect one's dress, to let it go into disorder; slabbsack, slamp, slampamp, a slovenly woman.—Danneil. Swiss schlampen, schlampern, to be flappy; Swab, schlappe, schlamp (Fr. salope), a slut; schlampampen, to go dawdling about; schlampere, schlampamp, Hamburgh slammetje, a slatternly woman. See Slattern. The meaning seems to vibrate between slackness or laziness of action, and the expression of neglect by the figure of loose, trailing, or flapping clothes.

SLAP Slander. OE. sclaunder, Fr. esclandre, scandal, discredit, from Lat. scandalum, a stumbling-block, cause of offence. 'Ce qui tourne au grand esclandre de la justice.'—Coutume d'Anjou in Dict. Etym. The word, as Menage remarks, was first escandre, then esclandre. Escandale, escande, escandle, escandre, esclandre, scandal, noise, bad example.—Roquef. We find skandre in R. Brunne.

Till Emme, Hardicnoutes moder he did a grete outrage, His brother a foule despite, himself vileyn skandre.—p. 53.

Slang. I. N. slengja, to fling, to cast; slengje kiæft'en (to fling jaw), to give bad words, to make insulting allusions, as in E. to slang or to jaw one are vulgarly used in the same sense. N. slengje-or (slang-words), insulting words, also new words taking rise from a particular occasion without having wider foundation.—Aasen. Pat. de Flandre, nomg'te (nom jété), a nickname, a name flung on one.—Vermesse.

2. A long narrow strip of land. Sw. slang, a stroke; piskslang, a slash with a whip. In the same way stripe signifies both a blow with a lash and a long narrow portion of surface. Pol. kresa, cut, slash, also a long streak. The word streak itself is a close relation to stroke.

Slangam. An awkward lout—Hal.; 'one that being sent on an errand is long in returning.'—Cot. in v. longis. N. slengja, slyngja, to dangle, sway to and fro, to saunter idly about; slyngjar, a dawdler. G. schlingel, a sluggard, lazybones, scoundrel, clown.

Slant. It. schiancio, oblique, sloping; a schiancio, aslant. The notion of obliquity seems derived from the figure of sliding or slipping aside. W. ysglentio, Sw. slinta, to slide, to slip. OFr. en esclenkaunt, obliquando (in the next page he writes espines for espines, thorns).—Neckam, Nat. Antiq. 'Fr. glisser, glincer, esclincher, esclinser, to slide or glance. Esclanche, the left side.—Roquef. Sc. sklent, to slope, decline, move or strike obliquely; glent, glint, to glance, gleam, glide, to start aside, to squint. See Glance.

Slap. A blow with the flat hand, from a direct imitation of the sound. To fall slap down, is to fall suddenly down so as to make the noise slap! It. schiaffo, a slap. In Da. slap, G. schlapp, schlaff, slack, loose, the sound represented is the flapping of a loose sheet.

To slap is also to slop or spill liquids, to sup up watery food. G. schlappen, Pl.D. slabben, to lap or sup up with a noise like dogs or pigs. Slabb' nich so! said to children who eat in such an ungainly manner.—Danneil. Thy milk slept up, thy bacon filcht! Gammer Gurton, ii. i.

Slash. A representation of the sound of a blow cutting through the air, or scissors closing sharply. What's this, a sleeve! 'tis like a demi cannon. What, up and down, carved like an appletart! Here's snip and nip, and cut and slish and slash. Taming of the Shrew. The same form is used to represent the dashing of liquids, or the flapping of loose clothes. E. dial. slashy, wet and dirty; Da. slaske, to dabble, paddle, to hang loose as flapping clothes; slasket, slovenly. See Slush. Sw. slaska, to paddle, to be sloppy; slask, puddle, wash.

To Slat. See Slate.

Slatch. The slack part of a rope which hangs down. See Slouch.

Slate. OE. sclat, sclaie, fissile stone used for roofing. The puple wenten on the roof and by the sclattis thei letten him doun with the bed into the myddil.—Wiclif. 'Sklat or slai stone.'—Pr. Pm. From Fr. esclat, a shiver, splinter, also a small and thin lath or shingle; s'esclater, to split, burst, crash, shiver into splinters.—Cot. Lang. esclata, to crack, chap; esclatos, chaps in the hands. Esclapa, to split wood; esclapo, a chip. The ultimate origin is a representation of the sound of a blow or of an explosion by the syllable sclat, slat, sclap, slap. O.Fr. esclat de tonnerre, a clap of thunder. To slat, to slap, to strike, to throw or cast down violently, to split or crack.—Hal. And withal such maine blows were dealt to and fro with axes that both headpeeces and habergeons were slat and dashed a-pieces.—Holland, Ammian in N.

Slattern.—Slut. The act of paddling in the wet and the flapping of loose textures are constantly signified by the same words, from the similarity in the sound by which the action is characterised in both cases; and the idea of a slovenly, dirty person may be expressed either by reference to his ragged, ill-fitting, neglected dress, or by the wet and dirt through which he has tramped. The Da. slaske is to dabble or paddle, and also (of clothes) to hang flapping about one, from the last of which senses must probably be explained slasket, slaskevorn, slovenly.

G. schlottern, to flap like loose clothes, and in Bavaria, to dabble in the mud; schlotterig, loose, flapping; schlotterig gekleidet gehen, to be slovenly or carelessly clad. Du. slodderen, to hang and flap; slodderkleed, loose flapping clothes; slodderig, slovenly, negligent; slodder, slodderer, a slattern, sloven. Pl.D. slodderig, loose, wabbling, lazy, slow, lifeless. Devonsh. sloudring, clumsy, loutish.—Hal. Swiss schlodig, negligent in dress. From the figure of flapping is derived Pl.D. slodde, a rag, then a ragged dirty man; Fris. slet, a rag or clout, a ragged slovenly woman—Epkema; Du. slodde, sordida et inculta mulier (Kil.), a slut. Da. slat, slattet, loose, flabby; slatte, a slut or slattern. But probably in many of these cases the idea of flapping or flagging is used in a figurative sense to express a dull, spiritless, inactive disposition, and not the actual flapping of loose and ragged clothing. Pl.D. sluddern, to flag, to hang loose, to be slow, to deal negligently with. On the other hand, from the same original imitation of sound with the foregoing, are Bav. schlott, schlutt, mud, dirt, sloppy weather; schlutt, a puddle, a dirty person, a slut; Swab. schlettern, to slatter or spill liquids, schlutt, a slut or dirty woman; E. dial. slud, sludge, mud, dirt; slutty, dirty. Bav. schlotzen, to dabble in the mud, to be negligent and slow; schlotz, dirt, mud; schlotzen, schlutzen, an uncleanly woman. See Sleet, Slouch.

Slave. Fr. esclave. It. schiavo, G. sclave. Commonly supposed to be taken from the name of the Sclavonian race, the source from which the German slaves would be almost exclusively derived, and it is in favour of this derivation that the ODu. had slavven as well as slave, a slave. But possibly the word may be formed on the same principle with the synonymous drudge, a name derived from dragging heavy weights and doing such like laborious work. Da. slæbe, to drag, trail, toil, drudge; slæbe en sæk paa ryggen, to carry a sack on one's back; slæbe-kjole, gown with a train; slæbetoug, a towing line. Slæb, a drudge. E. dial. slab, a drudge, a mason's boy.—Forby. Fris. slobbjen, Du. slooven, to toil, to moil, or drudge. N. slava, to slave or drudge; slave, a drudge, a slave. G. schleppen, Du. sleypen, to drag or trail; sleype, the train of a gown. Sw. släp, train of a gown, laborious work.

To Slaver. A variation of slabber, slobber, in the same way that the G. has schlaff as well as schlapp, slack. ON. slafra, to lick, to chatter, slefa, N. sleve, slaver, drivel; Lat. saliva. Slavering or slattering weather, a continuance of slight rain.—Forby.
To Slay.—Slaughter, AS. slean, sloh, geslagen, to slay, smite, strike, cast. Goth. slahan, to strike; afslahan, to slay; ON. slá, to strike; slátr, slaughter, meat of slaughtered cattle; slátra, to slaughter. G. schlagen, to strike, to move with violence; schlacht, battle; schlachten, to slay, to slaughter.
From the sound of a blow represented by the syllable slag, as smack, slap, slash, &c., all signifying the act of striking with a certain noise.
* Sleave. Sleave or sleave silk would seem to be the tangled refuse of the cocoon which cannot be wound off, but only spun. It. capitone, the hurds of silk cods, or coarse sleeve-silk, floscio, faint, drooping; seta floscia, sleave or ravelling silk; flosciare, to ravel as sleave silk doth.—Fl. Fr. flosche, faggy, weak, soft; soie flosche, sleave silk.—Cot.
Eight wild men apparelled in green moss made with sleave silk.—Hollinshed.
The meaning is probably husk or cod silk, from G. schlaube, schlaue, Pl.D. sluwe, Du. sloove, sluive, the husk, cod, pod of peas, beans, &c., husk of grain, the covering out of which the grain is slipped. Bav. schlauffen, sloufen, to make to slip; inslouf, indumentum; urslouf, exuviæ.—Schm. See Sleeve. From the nature of sleave silk, sleave acquires the sense of a tangled mass of fibrous matter, as when Shakespeare speaks of ' the ravelled sleave of care.'
Sled.—Sledge. 1. Du. sledde, slidde, G. schlitten, a sledge or carriage made to slide along the ground instead of rolling on wheels. G. schlittern, to slide or slither; schlitten, a sledge; schlittschuh, a skate or sliding shoe. It. slisciare, to slide or glide, to go on sleds or trucks; sliscio, a sled.—Fl. ON. sledi, sledge; slodi, anything that is dragged over the ground, as a brush-harrow. Gael. slaod, drag, haul, trail along the ground, a raft or float, a sledge. To slade, to drag on a sledge.—Forby; sled, to drag the feet, to go slipshod.—Craven Gl. Sladering drag, a small drag sliding on the ground, drawn by one horse.—Hal. To slade is to make to slide, as Da. slæbe, Du. sleypen, to trail or drag, is to make to slip, but we must not in either case assume that the factitive is a derivative form from the neuter verb. See Slade.

Perhaps the form sledge may correspond to OHG. sleihha, a sledge; sleichim, traheæ. — Graff. From slihhan, G. schleichen, to slide.
Sledge. 2. AS. slecge, Da. slægge, Sw. slagga, a large smith's hammer, from AS. slean (ppl. geslagen), to strike. See Slay.
Sleek.—Slick. Polished, smooth.
Her flesh tender as is a chike, With bent browes smooth and slike.
R. R. in R.
Who will our palfreys slick with wisps of straw.
B. & F., Knight of burning pestle.
Which dissolved, and he Slicked all with sweet oil.—Chapman, Odyssey.
The most natural type of the act of smoothing a surface is a cow or a cat licking its young or its own skin. ON. sleikja, Da. slikke, to lick. N. sleikja, also to stroke with the hand; slikja, to be sleek, to shine; slikjande, sleek, shining. Hesten æ so fat' at dæ slikje ti haar'a, the horse is so fat that its coat shines. ON. slikja, to sleek, to polish; slikju-steinn, a whetstone. E. slickstone, a stone for polishing the surface of paper or cloth.
In the same way Gael. slìob, lick, stroke, rub gently with the hand, polish; slìobta, licked, stroked, polished. N. sleip, smooth, slippery, polished; slipa, to whet; slipe-stein a whetstone. Du. slijpen, to grind, whet, polish.
Sleep.—Slumber. Goth. slepan, OHG. slâfan, slaffan, G. schlafen, Du. slaapen, to sleep. The radical figure is probably the relaxation of all the vital energies in sleep, from OHG. slaf, slaff, slack, relaxed, weak, slothful; slafen, slaffen, tabescere, torpere, dissolvi; arslaffen, resolvi, elanguéscere. G. einschlafen, to slacken, become remiss, to fall asleep. ON. slapa, to hang loose. Russ. slab, relaxed, loose, feeble; slabety, to faint, become slack.
When one of our limbs is rendered temporarily torpid by pressure, we say that it is asleep. Westerwald schlaafen, to go lazily and slow, to drag on; schlaafer, schlaafsack, a lazybones; schlaafig, schlaaferig, dawdling, lazy.
In the same way G. schlummern, Du. sluimeren, sluimen, E. to slumber, NE. sloom, slaum, a gentle sleep or slumber (Grose), to sleam, to slumber, sloomy, dull, slow, inactive, dreamy, may be derived from the root slap, stamp, slump (indicated under Slammack), signifying flagginess, feebleness, slackness, relaxation. Du. slomphose, loose bagging trousers; Bav. schlumpen, to slobber, to hang loose and negligently, to be negligent, especially in dress; schlummerig, loose.

flapping. E. dial. slommakin, slovenly, loose, untidy. To go slooming along is to go along in a dreamy, inactive way. ON. sluma, to be dejected ; slæmileiki, failure of strength ; at slæma til, opus aliquod leviter et invalide attrectare (Gudm.), to go to it in a sloomy way. Sw. slumra, to slumber ; öfver, to slubber a thing over, to pass over it slightly ; slumrare, a lazybones, indolent, sluggish person ; slumrig, indolent, lazy, torpid, negligent. Without the initial s, Swiss luhm, lumm, soft, gentle, then sleepy, spiritless, yielding. Das wetter lüemet, the weather becomes mild. Du. lome, slow, lazy.—Kil. Swiss lummern, to lounge, slug, lie lazily about.

Sleet.—Sludge.—Slush. The sound of paddling in the wet and dirt or of the dashing of water and wet bodies, is represented by the syllables slash, slosh, slush, slatter, slotter, slitter, sladder, slodder, sludder, with such modifications as are common in the different dialects of the Gothic race ; and with the image of paddling in the wet is constantly joined that of the flapping of loose textures, and the idea of slackness or looseness, passing into that of inactive, slow, lazy, slovenly.

We use the words slosh and slush with a distinct consciousness of their effect in representing the sound of dashing water. To slosh or slush, to splash about liquid mud. It sloshes so, is often said after a thaw. To slush, to wash with much water without rubbing. ‘Slush it in the river.’—Mrs Baker. Slosh, snow in a melting state.—Craven Gl. Sc. slash, a great quantity of broth or sorbillaceous food ; slashy, wet and dirty.—Jam. Corresponding forms are Da. slaske, to dabble, paddle, to hang flapping as loose clothes ; Sw. slaska, to dabble, splash, slop ; slaskväder, sloppy weather ; snö-slask (sloshy snow), sleet. Bav. schlass, schloss, loose, slack, flaccid. Swiss schlassem, soft damp snow, slack.

With a change of the final sound from s or sh to d or t, W. yslotian, to dabble, paddle ; E. dial. sladdery, sloddery (Mrs Baker), slattery, wet, dirty ; to slatter, to wash in a careless manner, throwing the water about ; slattering, rainy weather.—Forby. ‘It’s varra slattery walking.’ To slat, to dash water ; slat, a spot of dirt.—Craven Gl. ON. sletta, to splash ; Swab. schlettern, to spill liquids. E. dial. slotter, to dirty, to spatter with mud, and as a noun, filth, nastiness; Bav. schlottern, schlotten, schlütten, schlotzen, to dabble ;

schlotter, mud, dirt ; schlott, schlutt, mud, dirt, sloppy weather, thaw. Swiss schluderji, to slobber, eat and drink uncleanly ; schluderig, watery ; geschluder, slops ; Swab. g’schlütten, snowy and rainy weather in winter ; schluttig, sloppy, rainy, E. dial. sludder, to eat slovenly ; slodder. sluther (Mrs Baker), slud, sludge, slutch, slush, wet mud. Da. slud, sluus, N. sletta. Lap. slatte, rain and snow together, or sleet ; N. slatra, to rain and snow together.

Sleeve. AS. slyf, Fris. slief, a sleeve, what one slips the arm into, from Bav. schleiffen, to slip (as a bird does its head under its wing) ; schlaufen, to slip in or out ; anschlaufen, to slip on an article of dress ; Swab. anschlieffen, ausschlieffen, to slip on or off ; einschlaufen, the whole dress ; Swiss schlauf, a muff for slipping the hands into. E. dial. slive, to put on hastily. ‘I’ll slive on my gown and gang wi’ thee.’—Craven Gl. Where her long-hoarded groat oft brings the maid And secret slive it in the sibyl’s fist.—Clare. I slyppe or slyde downe, je coule; I slyve downe; je coule.—Palsgr.

On the same principle Du. sloop, Fris. slupe, a pillow-slip, the washing cover that is slipped on and off a pillow ; beslopje, to slip a covering over. See Slop.

* Sleeveless. Wanting reasonableness, propriety, solidity.—Todd. A sleeveless errand, reason, tale. Probably a corruption of Sc. thewless, thieveless, unprofitable, unsatisfactory ; a thieveless excuse, errand, &c., exactly as E. sleeveless. AS. theaw, custom, manner, thew ; theawlice, according to manners, decently, properly.

Sleazy. Weak, wanting substance.—J. I cannot well away with such sleazy stuff, with such cobweb compositions.—Howell in Todd. The radical sense is, apt to fray or tear, from G. schleissen (the equivalent of E. slit), to fray, wear out, tear, slit, split.—Küttn. E. dial. sleeze, to separate, come apart, applied to cloth when the warp and woof readily separate from each other ; sleezy, disposed to sleeze, badly woven.—Jennings. Carinthian schleiss’n, to tear or to fall asunder ; schleissik, worn out, ready to tear ; a’ schleissige pfât, a threadbare coat. Cimbr. slaiscg, thin through wear, worn out. See Slit.

Sleight. See Sly.

Slender. ODu. slinder, tenuis, exilis.—K. The radical meaning is pliant, bending to and fro, thence long and thin, from a verb signifying to dangle, to sway to and fro, the evidence of which is preserved in Bav. schlenderling, something dangling; rotzschlenderling, stiria e naso pendens—Schm.; G. schlendern, to stroll, saunter, walk about without settled purpose; Du. slidderen, slinderen, to wriggle, to creep as a serpent.—Kil. On the same principle G. schlank, pliable, slender, from Bav. schlanken, schlinkschlanken, to dangle; Pl.D. slakkern, slukkern, slunkern, to waggle, joggle.
To Slew. To turn round.—Hal. Properly to slip. ' It slewed round to the other side.'
A lynnand cord they slewyt our his hed Hard to the bawk, and hangyt him to ded.
Wallace.
Slewyt, slipped.—Jam. It is the same word with E. slive, to slip. See Sleeve.
Slice. OFr. escleche, separation, dismemberment, portion; esclisse, a splinter; esclisier, to separate, divide.—Roquef. G. schleissen, to cleave, slit, split. ON. slita, to tear asunder; slitr, a piece torn off. See Slit.
Slick. See Sleek.
Slidder.—Slither.—Slide. Du. sledderen, slidderen, slibberen, to slip, slide, fall; slidderen, slinderen, to creep (wriggle) like a serpent. W. llithr, a slip, slide; llithrig, slippery. Lith. slidtis, sliddus, slippery, smooth, shining; slidin'eti, slysti, Pol. slizgad sie, to slip, slide; sliski. It. sliscio, slisso, slippery; slisciare, to slide. Lett. slids, slanting; sliddet, sliddinat, to slide; slidèt, to slip; sliddens, slisch, slippery, sloping, steep. The radical signification is probably a vacillating unsteady movement, as in Du. slodderen, slobberen, to flap, flag, waggle; G. schlottern, to waggle, joggle, swag; ON. slodra, to drag oneself on; Sw. sliddrig, loose, flagging. From the notion of a vacillating movement arises that of slipping or sliding as opposed to moving steadily onwards. And from the frequentative and earlier form slidder is formed the verb to slide, to move smoothly over a surface without leaving it. The root is then applied to smoothness of surface which causes one to slide. See To Slur. It is however equally difficult to ignore the relation of slide with glide; slidder with glidder, slippery; Sw. slinta, to slip, slide, with E. glint, to glance, w. ysglentio, to slip, or to derive both series from a common image. See To Glide.
Slight. G. schlecht, originally plain, smooth, straight, then plain, simple, unqualified, plain as opposed to what is of superior value, low in value, mean in estimation, bad, base; schlicht, sleek, smooth, even; schlichten, to straighten, to make smooth or flat. Du. slecht, slicht, planus, aequus, et simplex, et ignobilis, communis, vulgaris, vilis, tenuis—Kil.; slechten, slichten, to level to the ground, to demolish.
In three days they slighted and demolished all the works of that garrison.—Clarendon in R. Goth. slaihts, ON. slettr, even, smooth; Sw. slät, smooth, polished, plain, poor, slight, common, bad. Släta ord, flattering words. N. sletta, to fling or cast, explains the passage where Falstaff speaks of being slighted out of the buck-basket into the river. Skoen slatt utav fot'a, the shoe was cast or flew from his foot; sletta mæ haandaa, to fling with the hands.
Slim. Slender, thin, slight, also distorted, worthless, sly, crafty.—Hal. Du. slem, slim, transverse, oblique, distorted, worthless, bad. Slim, pravus, perversus, astutus, vafer.—Bigl. Slimgast, a sly fellow; slimbeen, slimvoet, having a distorted leg or foot. Bav. schlimm, wry. Fris. slom, oblique; aslem (of the door), half open; slemme, to set the door ajar.—Outzen. E. dial. slam, the slope of a hill; tall and lean.—Hal. ON. slæmr, vilis, invalidus; at slæma til, to set slackly to work. Probably the original meaning of the word may be flagging, flaccid, then hanging down, sloping, leading to the idea of obliquity and depravity. See Slammack, Slope. To slim in Sussex is to do work in a careless and deceptive manner (Hal.), to be compared with ON. slæma, above mentioned, and Pl.D. slamp, a slovenly woman. E. dial. slimmy, of slight texture.—Hal.
Slime. G. schlamm, mire, mud; schleim, ON. slim, Du. slijm, slime, viscous matter. In the same way, without the initial sibilant, AS. lam, Pl.D. leem, G. lehm, loam, clay, mud; leim, AS., lime, glutinous matter. Lat. limus, mud.
Probably the fundamental notion may be sloppy mud, from a representation of the sound of dabbling in wet. Du. slobberen, slabberen, slabben, to slap up liquid food; Gael. slaib, E. dial. slob, Du. slibbe, slibber (limus, cænum mollius—Kil.), mud, ooze. Slip in the Potteries is the name given to the sloppy mixture of clay and water.
The terminal labial is first nasalised, as in Bav. schlampen, to lap like a dog, to eat greedily and uncleanly, and finally extinguished, leaving the nasalising liquid into which it seems to have been converted. Thus we have Du. slempen, slemmen, G. schlämmen, schlemmen, to guzzle, live luxuriously, while in a different appli- cation G. schlamm, mud, corresponds to Gael, slaib, E. slob, above mentioned. The same connection is seen between G. schlocken, schlicken, Du. slacken, slicken, to guzzle (from the sound of supping up liquids), and Du. slijck, G. schlick, mud. On the other hand, there are grounds for suspecting that the name of slime may be derived from the image of licking. Gael, sliob, to lick, stroke, rub gently with the hand—Macleod ; to smooth, polish, besmear—Armstrong ; sliom (properly to lick?), to smooth, gloss, flatter; sliom, sleek, smooth, slippery, lubricated. Na brie shliom, the sleek (slimy) trout. Esthon. libbama, limpama, to lick ; libbe, smooth, slippery, flattering; limma, slime, mud.

Sling. Sw. slänga, to totter, stagger, twist, swing, fling, hurl. Slinga, to twist ; slingra, to curl, to roll. Slänga sig som en mask, to writhe like a worm. Da. slingre, to reel, stagger, roll like a ship. Du. slingern, to dangle, stagger, whirl round, hurl ; slingen, slingeren, to creep as a serpent, to sling ; slinger, slanger, spira.—Kil. Slinger, a pendulum, a sling.—Bomhoff. G. schlingen, to twist ; schlingeln, to loiter, saunter, ramble.

To Slink. To creep or move secretly, to slip a foal or calf, i. e. cast it privily before its time. AS. slincan, to creep, crawl ; slicend, a reptile, creeping thing. G. schleichen, Du. sleyken, to sneak, slink, creep ; sleynke, a hole. Das Schleichen einer Schlange, the wriggling of a serpent. Sw. slinka, to dangle. Håret slinker kring öronen, the hair hangs loose about the ears. Slinka efter quinfölk, to dan- gle after women. Han slank bart, he slunk away. Tiden slinker förbi, time slips by. N. slentja, to dangle, sway to and fro, saunter, loiter. Bav. schlanken, schlinkschlanken, schlinkenschlanken, to dangle, sway to and fro, loiter about ; schlänkeln, to dangle ; schlenkern, to swing, to sling. Swiss schlenggen, schlenken, to sway to and fro. Lith. slinkti, to slip, slide, creep. Plaukai slenka, the hair falls off. Slankioti, to lounge, saunter, dawdle. Slinkas, lazy, slow.

The radical idea in creeping or crawl- ing is wriggling onwards, moving onwards by alternate movements to the right and left, and the notion of secrecy seems to arise from the movement not being directed in a continuous right line to the object sought for. On this principle it is argued under Slender, that the primitive meaning of Du. slinderen, to creep like a serpent, is to wriggle, to move by zigzag efforts.

Slip.—Slippery. It may perhaps not be possible to trace the derivation of the word slip in all its senses from a single source. In the first place, from Sw. slapp, lax, slack, we have släppa, to let loose, let slip. Släpp hunden lös, let the dog loose, let slip the dog. Släppa något ur händ- erna, to let slip a thing out of one's hands. Släppa fram ett ord, to slip out a word. Släpphänd, clumsy-handed, apt to let slip out of one's hands.
From the foregoing seems to be formed the neuter slippa, slapp, sloppit (ON. sleppa, slapp, sloppit), to slip, to get off, get loose from, escape. Ett ord slapp fram för honom, a word slipped out from him, he let fall a word. Sömmen slipper up, the seam rips up, comes apart, separ- ates. In a similar way we speak of taking a slip from a plant, i. e. separating a small portion of the plant from the parent stem. When the foot slips, it loses its hold. When we speak of anything slip- ping through an obstacle we imply that it gets loose from it, is not held by it. To slip into a chamber implies escape from something that might have hindered the action. G. schlüpfen, Pl.D. slippen, slupen, to slip away, slip or slide into ; Sw. slipprig, G. schlüpfrig, ON. sleipr, OE. slipper, slippery. Swab. schlappig, schlapperig, loose, flagging; schlapper, old trodden-down shoes, slippers. To slip on a garment is to throw it loosely over one. So also we may compare G. schlaff, loose, with Bav. schleiffen, schloufen, sloufen, to slip in, slip on. Der spar slaifft sein haubt under sein fittig, the sparrow slips its head under its wing. ' Aneslouf, indue.' Einschlauf what is slipped on, dress ; ürslouf what is slip- ped off, cast clothes, skin, &c. Schleiffen, OHG. slifan, G. schleifen, to slide, glide.
Perhaps we should set out from forms like slabber, slobber, representing the agitation of liquids or loose textures ; Du. slobberen, laxum sive flaccidum esse, to flap ; slibbe, slibber, mud, mire ; slibberigh, muddy, slippery ; slibberen, to slip, slide.—Kil. Somerset slopper, loose, unfixed.—Hal.

To Slit. AS. slitan, to tear, to con- sume ; G. schleissen, to slit, split, fray, wear out ; schleisse, a splint, lint, scraped linen. Sw. slita, to tear, separate by force. Slita sig lös ifrån, to shake oneself free from ; slita opp ur jorden, to tear up out of the earth. Slita ut kläder, to wear out clothes; slita sönder, to tear asunder; slitning, wear and tear. ON. slita, to tear asunder, separate; slita flokk, to dismiss an assembly; slita thing-i, to close the court; slitr, slitri, a rag, portion. Da. slide, to pull, tear, to wear, to toil, drudge.

Sliver. A splinter, slice, slip.—Hal. Slive, sliver, a large slice.—Mrs Baker. "Tis broke all to slivvers.'—Moor. Westerwald schliewer, a splinter. AS. slifan, Craven slieve, to cleave, split. Slyvyn asundyr, findo; slyvynge of a tre or other lyke, fissula.—Pr. Pm. ' I slyve a gylowflowre from his braunche or stalke.'—Palsgr. Tusser uses sliver for split logs of firewood. To slive, to slip, slide.—Mrs B. See Sleeve, Slip.

Slobber. See Slabber.

Sloe. Du. sleeuwe, sleepruyme, G. schlehe, the small astringent wild plum, so named from what we call setting the teeth on edge, which in other languages is conceived as blunting them.—Adelung. Du. slee, sleeuw, dull, blunt; (of the teeth) set on edge; (of fruit) sour, astringent. Sleeuwe scherpte, a blunt edge; sleeuwe tanden, stupidi dentes, obtusi.—Kil. Die pruimen zijn soo slee als of het wilde pruimen waren: these plums are as sour as sloes. Bav. schleh, blunt, set on edge. ON. sliofr, dull, inactive, blunt; sliofar tennur, teeth on edge.

Sloop. Du. sloepe, a shallop, light vessel; from sloepen, sluipen, to slip? See shallop.

Slop. I. Imitative of the sound of dashing water. To slop, to make a noise when supping liquid.—Teesdale Gl.
Thy milk slop't up, thy bacon filcht. Gammer Gurton, ii. 1.
Du. slabben, to lap, to slobber. Lap. slabbot, to sprinkle; slebbet, to pour, to splash; slappe, wet and soft snow partly thawed. Fris. door dik, door dun te slobben, to splash through thick and thin.—Epkema.

2. A loose, outer dress, smock-frock.
His overest sloppe it is not worth a mite. Chaucer.
With slop-frock suiting to the ploughman's taste. Clare.
ON. sloppr, a wide outer dress, a surplice, night-dress. Fris. slupe, a pillow-slip; beslopje, to slip a covering over. Bav. schlauffen, to slip in or out; anschlauffen, to slip on an article of dress; einschlauf, the whole dress. Du. slobbe, sloejhose, a pair of slops or loose bagging breeches. The connection of the latter form with slobberen, to flap or flag, laxum sive flaccidum esse, corroborates the derivation above given of slip from slapp, loose, slack. See Sleeve.

To Slope. To hang obliquely downwards like a slack rope, from Du. slap, slack.—Skinner. But the immediate origin is a verb like ON. slápa, flaccere, pendere—Haldorsen; N. slape, to hang down, to slope or be a little inclined downwards. ON. slapeyrdr, lop-eared, having hanging ears.

Slot. 1.—Sleuth. The slot of a deer is the print of a stag's foot on the ground. Sc. sleuth, the track of man or beast as known by the scent, whence sleuth-hound, a bloodhound, dog kept for following the track of a fugitive. ON. slöd, track, path, way; döggslod, the track left by men or animals in the dew; mark made by something dragging along when the ground is covered with dew; slodi, a drag-harrow. Cheshire cartslood, cart-rut.—Wilbraham. Gael, slaod, trail along the ground; slaodan, the track or rut of a cart-wheel. Pol. slad, a trace, track, footprint. See To Slade.

* Slot. 2. A bolt. Slot or schytyl of a dore, verolium (Fr. verrouil).—Pr. Pm. Probably a somewhat different application of Du. slot, a lock or fastening, from sluiten, G. schliessen, to shut. Du. sluitboom, a bar, barrier, rail; vectis et clathrus; slotel, a key; slotelen, securicute, subscudes duo tigna inter se vincientes.—Kil. From this last may probably be explained Cleveland slot, a crossbeam or bar running from one side to another in any construction; slotes of a cart, the underpieces which keep the bottom together; slotes of a ladder or a gate, the flat step or bar.—B.
Slot in engineering is a hollow for the head of a bolt or the like to work in, the tuck in a dress for a string to run in.—Atkinson. Probably from Du. sluitgat, a mortise or hollow to hold a tenon.

Sloth. See Slow.

Slouch. To slouch is to flag, to hang down for want of inherent stiffness, to do anything with unstrung muscles, to walk with a negligent gait. A slouch, a lubberly fellow.—B. ' No weather pleaseth: it is colde, therefore the slouch will not plow.'—Granger in Todd. The slatch of a rope is the slack part of a rope which hangs trailing.
From ON. slakr, slack, we pass to Sw. sloka, to droop; sloka med öronen, med wingarna, to hang the ears, drag the wings. Slokhatt, a slouch hat, hat with hanging flaps; slokbjörk, a weeping birch.

Gå och sloka, to go slouching about. ON. slókr, a slouch or dull inactive person. Da. slukøret, slouch-eared, having hanging ears.
In the same way without the initial s, W. llac, slack, loose; llacio, to droop, to decline; ON. lóka, to hang down; lókr, anything hanging; lókubyr, a light wind that lets the sails flap; Fr. locher, to shake like a loose wheel; loque, a dangling rag; E. dial. louch-eared, having hanging ears; G. latschen, to go dragging one's feet, to slouch along.
In another set of parallel forms the final k of slack is exchanged for ss, t, or tz. Bav. schlottern, to hang dangling, to slouch about (Schmid); schlotzen, to dabble in the dirt, to be negligent and slow; schlótz, a lazy slow person; schlaß, schlatt, flaccid, slack; schlattóret, slouch-eared; schlátté, a lazy ill-dressed person; Swab. schloßigkeit, inactivity; ON. slóta, slúta, to be relaxed, to soften, to hang down. Veðrinn slótar, the weather becomes mild. Láta hattinn slóta, to slouch one's hat, let the flap hang down.

Slough. I. A deep muddy place in which one is ingulfed. Du. slocken, to swallow; slock, gula, fauces, et barathrum, vorago, gurges.—Kil. Gael. sluig, swallow, ingulf; slugpholl, a whirlpool; slugaid, a slough or deep miry place.
* 2. The cast skin of a snake; the skin or husk of a gooseberry or currant (Atkinson); the crust of dead matter that separates from a sore. MHG. slûch, the skin of a snake; G. schlauch, properly, as balg, the skin of an animal stripped off, and made into a vessel for liquids, a wineskin, hose for conveying liquids, also the loose skin of a horse's sheath. The meaning of the word is something slipped off, that from which something has slipped, from OHG. slîhhan, MHG. slichen, G. schleichen, to slip, slide, slink. Bav. schlaichen, to slip in or out, to convey privily; einem etwas zuschlaichen, to slip or slive it into his hand. Schlich, the gliding of a brook or of serpents, to be compared with slough, the slime of snakes (marking the track where they have slid).—Hal. In the same way from the parallel form OHG. slîfan, Bav. schleiffen, E. dial. slive, to slide, slip, with the factitive schlauffen, sloufen, to make to slip, are schlauff, that into which a man slips; inslouf, indumentum; urslouf, exuviae; G. schlauf, a serpent's slough; schlaube, husk or cod of beans, &c. (Sanders); Du. sloof, sloove, husk, velum, tegmen, exuviae; also the prepuce, in which sense it is to be compared with G. schlauch, the sheath of a horse.

* Sloven. A person careless of dress and personal cleanliness. Du. slof, sloef, an old slipper, and fig. a sloven or slut. Sloef, toga sive tunica rudis, impolita et sordidula; sloefhose, tibiale laxum.—Kil. See Slop.
Slow.—Sloth. AS. sleaw, slaw, lazy, slow; slawian, aslawian, to be lazy, torpid; slawth, slewth, sloth. Du. sleeuw, sche, blunt, ineffective; Bav. schlew, schlewig, feeble, flat, faint, slow, insipid, unsalted, lukewarm, blunt; OHG. slewe, slewechait, torpor.—Schm.; sleo, sleuuo, dull, faded, lukewarm; sleuuen, to fade, waste, become torpid, indifferent, lukewarm; sleuui, languor, dullness; slewig, slebig, dull; Swab. schlaib, unsalted, watery, thin, empty. ON. sljóðr, slæer (islæfr), blunt, dull, slow, inactive; slæva, sljóva, to blunt, dull, slacken; Da. slov, Sw. slo, blunt, dull, slow of apprehension. Probably Pol. slaby, faint, weak, feeble, dull of hearing, Russ. slabuii, slack, relaxed, weak, faint, feeble, belong to the same stock. The radical image would be the slapping of a slack structure, as a rope or the sail of a ship. Related forms are Du. slap, G. schlaff, slack, flaggy, weak, soft, flat. Met slappe handen te werk gaan, to work slowly. Du. slof, slow, negligent, careless.
Slowworm. This name may really signify what it appears to do, as motion is very difficult to the animal on a bare surface such as a road, where it is frequently found, though among herbage it is agile enough. But the element slow is suspiciously like schleich in the G. name blindschleiche, Carinthian schleich, plintschleich, plintschlauch, from schleichen, to slide. In N. it is called sleva, slöge, slöe, perhaps from its slime; slive, slaver, drivel.
To Slubber. A word of like formation with slabber, slobber, representing the sound of supping up liquids into the mouth, dabbling in the wet, &c. ON. slupra, Dan. slubre, Pl.D. slubbern, to sup up liquids. Hence in Hamburgh metaphorically, from the notion of hasty and greedy eating, slubbern, to slubber up, to do a thing carelessly and superficially; slubberer, slubberup, a careless, negligent person.
Bassanio told him he would make some speed Of his return: he answered, Do not so, Slubber not business for my sake. Merch. Venice.

Du. slobberen, to sup up liquids like ducks, pigs, &c., to sup up in a dirty uncouth manner; over heen slobberen, to pass lightly over a matter. In like manner Du. slorpen, slorven, to sup up, serve to explain Sw. slurfva, to bungle, botch, slubber.

To slubber is also to slobber or spill liquids in eating, hence to dirty.
To slubber the gloss of your new fortunes. Shakesp.
N. slubba, to spill liquids, to dirty.
Sludge. See Slush.

Slug.—Sluggard. Another of the numerous metaphors from the image of a loose unstrung condition. Pl.D. slukkern, slunkern, Westerw. schlockern, schluckern (synonymous with schlappern, schlottern), to wabble, shake to and fro. Da. slug-öret, sluk'dret, having flagging ears. To slug is thus to lie slack and unstrung, to indulge in sloth.

He lay all night slugging under a mantle. Spenser in Todd.
I slogge, I waxe slowe or drawe behynde.—Palsgr.
A slug is a creature of a soft boneless consistency. ON. slæki, a dull, inactive person.
In like manner without the initial s, Swiss lugg, luck, loose, slack; das Seil lugget, the rope trails, is slack; Du. log, heavy, slow; E. luggish, dull, heavy, slow; lug, luggard, a sluggard; Fris. lugghen, to be lazy and slothful; luck, luggerig, slothful. Lith. slukyti (faullenzen), to slug; slunkis, a sluggard, a lazy creeper about; slinkas, lazy, slow.

Sluice. Sw. sluss, Du. sluys, G. schleuse, Fr. écluse, a sluice or floodgate. Da. sluse, lock in a canal; sluseport, floodgate. Mid.Lat. clusa, eclusa, as if for ex-clusa, from the notion of shutting off the water, a derivation supported by Swiss kluss, a large sluice in a gorge where water is collected until it is sufficient to wash down a collection of timber; klusen, verklusen, to stop the flow of water. Das Wasser hat sich geklusst, has stopped running.
But it may be doubted whether the Mid.Lat. form is not an accommodation, and the word really derived from the sloshing or slushing sound of the water as it rushes through the gates. To sluice one with water is to slosh water over him, to throw a mass of water over him. Sw. slosa, to lavish, squander; Da. dial. sluse, to purl as a brook. Westerw. schlosen, schlusen, to become sloshy, to thaw.
On the same principle Du. sas, a floodgate, may be connected with E. souse, representing the sound of dashing water. Soss, a slop; as a verb, to pour out, to dabble in the dirt. From the same origin is the cry sus! sus! to pigs to come to their wash.

To Slumber. See Sleep.

Slump. To fall plumb down into any wet or dirty place.—B. 'In Suffolk we should say, I slumped into the ditch up to the crotch.'—Moor. Slump, a dull noise made by anything falling into a hole.—Jam.
From representing the noise of a thing falling plump upon the ground the term is applied to chance, accident, what happens at a single blow or in an unforeseen manner. Pl.D. slump, a chance; slump-schöte, a chance shot; slumps, plump, thoughtlessly; up'n slump kopen, to buy upon the chance, without knowing the exact quantity. Sw. af en slump, by chance; en blott slump, a pure chance; slumpa, to buy things in block. Da. slumpe, to light, stumble, chance upon; slump, a lot. To slump things together, to throw them together in a single lot.

To Slur.—Slurry. To bedaub or dirty, whence met. slur, a stain or disgrace. Slur, slurry, thin washy mud.—Forby. To slairg, slerg, slairy, to bedaub.—Jam.
We have frequently had occasion to remark the identity of forms representing the sound of dabbling in the wet and the flapping of loose fabrics, giving rise to an intimate relation between words signifying mud or dirt, and a loose texture, a wabbling, vacillating, slipping or sliding movement, inefficient nerveless action, and the like.
The sound made by the agitation of liquids or of loose textures is represented by the forms sladder, slodder, sludder, slidder. Thus we have Da. sladder, sludder, tattle, idle talk (an idea constantly expressed by reference to the sound of dabbling in water); Swiss schlodern, to slobber in eating; E. dial. sludder, to eat slovenly; slodder, slud, sludge, wet mud—Hal.; sluther, liquid mud—Mrs Baker; Bav. schledern, to move to and fro in the water, to rinse linen; schluder, mud; schludern, schlodern, to wabble; schlaudern, to work negligently and superficially, to slur a thing over; Du. slodderen, to hang loose, to flag; slodderig, slovenly, negligent; Pl.D. sludern, sluren, to wabble, to flag or hang loose, to be lazy, to deal negligently with. Aver ene arbeid sluren, to slur over a piece of work. Slodderig, sludderig, slung, flagging, lifeless, inactive. De kleder sittet em so sludderig [or slurig] um't lief, the clothes hang so loose about him.—Du. sloore, slorken, sordida ancilla, serva vilis, ignava.—Kil. ; slooren, sleuren, to drag, trail, sweep along the ground as a loose hanging garment, a slack rope ; sloorigh, dirty. Swiss schlarggen, to dabble, to debaub, to go trailing or shuffling along; schlargg, a slur or spot of dirt ; geschlargg, nastiness, dirt ; schlarggig, dirty ; E. dial. sladder-ing-drag, a sled for trailing timber along; Pl.D. slarren, slurren, to shuffle, slip the feet along ; slarren, slurren, slippers, old shoes ; Du. slieren, to stagger, to slide on the ice, to drag.—Bomhoff ; E. dial. to slither, to slir, to slide, to slip.—Hal. Pl.D. slieren, to lick (to sup up).—Schütze. Bav. schlieren, to bedaub ; schlier, mud. ON. slör, uncleanness, slime of fish ; slorugr, dirty.

Slush. Slodder, slotter, sluther, slud, sludge, slutch, slosh, slush, are used provincially or in familiar language for wet mud or dirty liquid, melting snow, &c. The origin is a representation of the noise made by dabbling or paddling in the wet, by forms like Swiss schlodern, to slobber, E. dial. sludder, to eat slovenly, Bav. schledern, to rinse linen in water ; schlotzen, to dabble, Sw. slaska, to dash, dabble, slop, giving rise to Sw. slask, dirty liquid, Bav. schlott, schlutt, mud, slush, thawing weather ; schlotz, mud, dirt. Da. sladder, sludder, tattle, idle talk, belong to the same root, on the same principle that G. waschen signifies both to wash or to agitate in water and to tattle.

Slut. In this word, as in slattern, the idea of dirt is constantly mixed up with that of lazy negligent work, on the principle mentioned under Slur. Pl.D. slatte, sladde, anything that hangs loose and flagging, a rag ; slatje, Du. sladde, slodde, sletse, slet, Da. slatte, slutte, a slut, a negligent, slovenly woman ; Swab. schlatte, a lazy, slovenly man ; schlutt, a slut. Pl.D. slatterig, flaccid, flagging ; G. schlottern, to flag, dangle, wabble. Da. slat, slattet, loose, flabby ; slattes, to slacken ; Bav. schlattoret, having flag-ging ears. Bav. schlott, schlutt, mud, slosh ; schlutt, a puddle ; schlitten, to dabble in the wet and dirt ; schlutt, an uncleanly person. E. dial. slutch, mud.—Tim Bobbin ; slatch, the slack of a rope ; slatching, untidy.—Hal. ; slotch, a sloven; slotching, slovenly, untidy. His stockings hang slotchikin about his heels.—Mrs Baker. Slouch, a lazy fellow ; to walk about in an idle manner.—Hal. Bav. schlotzen, to dabble, meddle with dirt, to be lazy and negligent ; schlotzen, schlutzen, a slut ; schlotz, dirt, mud, a lazy person, sluggard.

Sly.—Sleight. Sleight, dexterity.—B. ON. slægr, crafty, cunning ; slægð, contrivance, cunning ; slægðarbragd, artful trick ; N. slög, dexterous, expert, clever, sly, cunning. Sw. slög, dexterous, handy ; slögd, mechanical art ; handa slögd, manufacture ; slug, G. schlau, Pl.D. sloöt, cunning, sly. The same connection of ideas is seen in handicraft compared with crafty, and in artificer compared with artful. And on the same principle cunning was formerly used in the sense of manual skill. Perhaps the ultimate origin may be found in the root slag, strike, from the use of the hammer being taken as the type of a handicraft. ON. slægr (applied to a horse) signifies apt to strike with his heels. Sw. slögda, opera fabrilia exercere."—Ihre. Slögamens werk, the work of artificers.—Jerem. x. 9. The radical unity of sly and sleight was formerly more distinctly felt than it is now. —And stele upon my enemy, For to slee him slehliche, slehies Ich by thenke. P.P. For thei ben sligh in such a wise That thei by slyght and by queintise Of fals witnes bringen inne That doth hem often for to winne. Gower in R.

Smack. 1. A syllable directly representing the sound made by the sudden collision or separation of two soft surfaces, as a blow with the flat hand, the sudden separation of the lips in kissing, or of the tongue and palate in tasting. Hence smack, a slap, a sounding blow, a hit with the open hand.—Hal. Du. smak, noise that one makes in eating. Gy moet zoo niet smakken als gy eet : you must not smack so in eating.—Halma. Smak, noise of a fall, [and thence] smakken, to throw, cast, fling, to fall down.—Bomhoff. Met dobbelsteenen smakken : to rattle the dice —Halma ; smackmuylen (muyl, the chops), maxillas sive labia inter se claro sono collidere, manducando sonum edere ; smacktanden, to strike the teeth together in chewing.—Kil. Kussen dat het smakt, to give one a smacking kiss. Pl. D. smaksen, G. schmatzen, Da. smaske, N. smatta, to smack with the tongue and chops in eating. Schmatzen is also applied, as E. smack, to a loud kiss. E. dial. smouch, smoucher, a loud kiss. Pol. smoktać, cmokać, to smack with the lips, to kiss, to sip or suck.
Smack represents the sound of a blow or of a sudden fall, in such expressions as knocking a thing smack down, cutting it smack off.
From the smacking of the chops in the enjoyment of food has arisen the sense of taste, in which the root smak is widely used. Pol. smak, savour, taste, relish. AS. smæccan, smecgan, to taste; Sw. smaka, Du. smaken, G. schmecken, to taste; geschmack, schmackhaft, of agreeable taste. Geschmacke speis, savoury food.—Schm. Pol. smaczny, well-tasted. Lith. smagurei, dainties; smagus, good, pleasant, nice. Lett. smakka, taste, smell.
In some dialects the initial s of the imitative syllable is dropped, as in Fris. macke, to kiss—Outzen; Fin. maku, taste; makia, well-tasting, sweet; maiskia, maskia, to smack the chops; maiskis, smacking, dainties, also a kiss; maistaa, to taste, to sip, to be savoury; maisto, the sense of taste, taste of a thing. Lat. maxilla, a jaw, must be referred to the same root. In Bohem. an l is inserted after the m; mlask, a smack with the mouth, a loud kiss; mlaskati, mlasstiti, to smack with the mouth; mlaskanina, delicacies.
2. Pl.D. smakk, Fr. semaque, a light vessel. The m is probably a corruption from an original n; AS. snakk, ON. sneckia, Sw. snäcka, Pl.D. snikk, a small vessel. The original meaning was probably a beaked vessel. OG. snaggun, snacgun, naves rostratæ—Gl. in Schmeller, who cites 'holzschuhe mit schnacken' as probably signifying wooden shoes with beaks. Sette Communi, snacko, beak. Swiss schneicke, schneugge, snout, from schneicken, schneuggen, Sw. snoka, to sniff, search about with the nose like a dog or a pig. See Snook. Lith. smikkis, snout, beak. Du. snoeck, a pike, from his beaked snout. Schmeller has also 'snarcken, rostratæ naves,' to be explained by Sw. snork (properly snout), extremity of anything, from snorka, to snort, snuff, sniff. Bav. schnorren, prow of a boat; schnorren, schnurren, snout, mouth and nose.
It is certain that this principle of nomenclature has taken place in the case of Du. sneb, a boat with a beak, from sneb, beak; and Pl.D. snau, snaudschip, a snow, a kind of small seaship, from snau, snout, beak; and probably navis may be connected in the same manner with neb, snout, beak, as G. nachen, Mid.Lat. naca, Fr. nacelle, a skiff, with Fin. nokka, beak. Wenheen nokka, the prow of a boat.
**Smackering.** A longing for: to have a smackering after a thing.—B. Originally a smacking of the chops at the thoughts of food, as Lat. ligurio, to long for, properly to lick the chops at, from lingere, to lick.
**Small.** Du. smal, thin, narrow, small; ON. smár, comp. smæri, superl. smæstr. Da. smaa, Fris. sma, smad, smæd, small; S. Da. smådsk (kleinlich), small in size.—Outzen. ON. smáregn, smásandr, fine rain, sand.
Perhaps from Da. dial. smadder, E. smatter, a fragment, Gael. smad, a particle, jot, the smallest portion of a thing. So in ON. of the golden calf, eg molaðe hann í smáat, I stamped it to powder.—Deut. 9. Sc. to smatter, to deal in small wares, to be busily employed about trivial matters; to smatter awa', to spend on a variety of articles of little value.
It may be observed that Pol. malo, little, has a similar connection with Lat. molere, to grind.
**Smalt.** A colour made from blue enamel. It. smalto, a name given to different bodies which are used as coatings in a melted or liquified state, and subsequently harden, as enamel, plaster of Paris, mortar. G. schmelz, enamel, metallic glass, from schmelzen, to melt. See Enamel.
**Smart.** As a noun or verb it signifies sharp pain; as an adjective, sharp, brisk; significations which may be connected on the supposition that the word originally signified a sharp stroke or cut. G. schmerz, Du. smart, pain, ache.
Da. snerte, to lash; snert, lash of a whip; Da. dial. at sidde snert (of a garment), to sit close; snyrt, neat, pretty, smart (smukt), ON. snirta, to smug, adorn, smarten; snirtinn, neat, spruce. Fris. snar, quick, smart; snirre, a stroke with a whip.—Outzen. The notion of smartness of dress is connected with that of briskness of action, as opposed to the dawdling movements of a slattern.
**To Smash.** It. smassare, to crush flat. See Mash. Gael. smuais, smash, break in pieces; smuaisrich, a breaking into pieces, splinters, fragments. Da. smaske, to smack with the lips in eating; Sw. smiska, to smack, slap; smiska sönder, to smash, break to pieces. It. smaccare, to crush, squash, bruise.
**Smattering.**—Smatch. Smatch, a taste or small touch of a quality. Smattering, superficial or slight knowledge; smatterer, one who has some smatch or tincture of learning. — B. Pl.D. smak-sen, G. schmatzen, Swiss schmatzern, schmatzeln, N. smatta, to smack with the tongue in eating. Fris. smeijtsen, to taste, to try.—Epkema.
After he had indifferently taught his scollers the Latine tong and some smackering of the Greek. — Primaudaye Fr. Acad. transl. by T. B. C. A.D. 1589, p. 3.
Smatters, in the expression breaking to smatters, must be explained from G. schmettern, to crash or crack, as a peal of thunder, and thence like zerschmettern, to break to pieces. Sw. smattra, to crackle. Tallved smattrar i elden, deal-crackles in the fire. And as the crackling is the result of the wood splitting to pieces, it is natural that the term which represents the crackling should be applied to the splinters. So Fr. éclat signifies both crack and fragment. Da. dial. smad-der, crack, fragment. Det gav en smad-der saa man kunde høre det langt borte, it gave a crash so that one could hear it a long way off. Det gik i smadder, it went to smatters. Han smaddrede ægget mod steenbroen, he smashed the egg on the pavement. Gael. smad, a particle, jot.
To Smear. Du. smeeren, G. schmieren, Bav. schmiren, schmirben, to smear, daub, grease; AS. smeru (g. smerwes), G. schmeer, ON. smjor, smor, fat, grease, butter. Another OE. form still provincially pre-served is smore or smoor. ' I smore one's face with any grease or soute : je bar-bouylle.' — Palsgr. And this probably points to the true origin of the word as a contraction from smother, which itself is provincially used in the sense of smear or daub. — Hal. Pl.D. smudderen, smud-delen, smullen, to dabble, dirty; smudder-regen, E. dial. smur, drizzling rain. Du. smodderen, smeuren, to daub, smear; smodderig, smorrig, smeerig, Fris. smorig, dirty; smorig linnen.—Epkema. Gael. smiir, smiùir, smiùrach, a blot, spot, par-ticle of dust, ashes, earth; smùir, smiur, bedaub, smear. The radical image would thus be the act of dabbling in the mud, and the name would be transferred to grease, as the material that daubs in the most effectual manner. On this principle G. schmutz, filth, dirt, is in Swiss applied to lard, butter, grease; schmutzen, to smear the hair with grease. Bav. schmotz, dirt, fat, grease. Pol. mazad, mazgad, to blot, smear, daub, anoint; maslo, butter. See Smother.
Smeech.—Smeegy. E. dial. smeech, a stench, obscurity in the air, arising from smoke, fog, or dust. To smeech, to make a stink with the snuff of a candle.—Hal. Smeegy, tainted, ill-smelling. — Moor. Connected with AS. smec, smic, smeoc, smoke, as G. riechen, to smell, with rauch, smoke. Bav. schmecken, to smell, and thence schmecker, the nose; schmecke, schmeckbuschel, a nosegay. There is however a strong tendency in the Ober Deutsch dialects, as in the English, to use the word in the sense of a bad smell. Thus the Swiss translation of the Bible, speaking of Lazarus in the tomb, says, ' Er ist vier tage im grabe gelegen, er schmecket jezt.' See Smoke.
Smell. The original sense of the word would seem to be dust, smoke, then smell, as G. riechen, to smell, from rauch, smoke. Pl.D. smelen, smellen, to burn slow with a strong-smelling smoke. Dat holt smelet weg, the wood smoulders away. Hier smelet wat, here is a smell of burning; smelerig, smelling of burning. — Brem. Wtb. Du. smeulen, to burn or smoke in a hidden manner.—Bomhoff. Pl.D. smöln, a verb applied to thick dust, mist, mizzling rain, a smoking fire.—Dan-neil. Lith. smalkas, smoke, vapour; smelkti, to smoke, to rise in vapour; smilksteti, to smoulder, burn in a hidden way; smilkyti, to perfume; smilkimas, perfume. Sw. smolk, dust; Da. dial. smelk, smilk, fine rain. Da. smul, dust; smule, to crumble. See Smoulder. On the same principle ON. dupt, dust, dupta, to throw out dust, N. duft, dupt, fine dust, dufta, to fly in dust, to smoke, must be identified with Da. duft, fragrance, dufte, to exhale odour, G. duft, vapour, mist, evaporation, the fine exhalation of sweet-smelling bodies, scent.
Smelt. G. schmelzen, Du. smelten, to melt, dissolve, liquefy. See Melt.
To Smicker. To look amorously upon. Sw. smeka, to stroke, caress, flatter; smickra. Da. smigre, to flatter; ON. smeykligr, smooth, sweet, flattering. Du. smeecken, smeeckelen, to speak smoothly, to implore, to flatter; G. schmeicheln, to coax, caress, fondle, cajole, flatter. See Smile.
To Smile. N. smila, Da. smile, OHG. smielan, MHG. smielen, smicren, Bav. schmieren, Manx smooir, to smile. AS. smærc, laugh; smercian, to smirk, smile, where smirk is evidently a diminutive form, in the same way that the Fris. has smilleken (Outzen), smilke (Junge), along-side of smillen, smiile, smeele.

It is probable that both modifications of the root, smile as well as smire, are contracted, the one from a form like G. schmeicheln, to caress, coax, flatter, the other from one like Sw. smickra, Da. smigre, of the same signification, both these latter forms being derivatives from an equivalent of Sw. smeka, OHG. smeicken, to caress, cajole; smeichan, assentiri, adulari, blandiri.—Graff. G. schmeicheln is actually used in the sense of smile. 'Sie lachlet, sie schmutzt, sie schmeichlet.'—Sanders. And conversely Westerwald schmieren and Sw. smila are used in the sense of fawn, coax, flatter. Smila or smeka sig in hos någon, to curry favour with one; smila med munnen (munnen, the mouth), to smile, to simper. Da. dial. smila, to flatter, to be false. Pol. smeać się, Boh. smati se, to laugh. Lett. smeet, to laugh; smeekls, laughter, sport, ridicule; smaidīt, to smile, flatter, sport. Sanscr. smi, to smile.

The ultimate origin of the expression may be the caressing of an infant with the mouth and chin, whence the designation of the chin seems to be used in expressing the idea of caressing. Sw. smekas, to caress one another, to bill and kiss; smekunge, a darling. Gael. smig, smigean, Manx smeggyl, Lith. smakras, the chin, Gael. smig, smigean, also a smile, mirth. In the same way, from Fin. leuka, the chin, leukailla, to use the chin, to kiss, sport, smile. So also W. gwên, a smile, gweniaith, flattery, seem connected with gen, chin, jaw, mouth. The introduction of the w, at least, need cause no difficulty, as we have both gwenfa and genfa, a bit, curb, from gen, jaw.

On the other hand, a smile may be considered as smothered laughter, and may be typified by the smoke and ashes which betray the presence of a smouldering fire. Thus we may compare Du. smuylen, smollen (K.), Swab. schmollen, Fris. smillen, smilleken, smilke, to smile, N. smolla, smolka, to laugh low, to titter, with Du. smeulen, Pl.D. smelen, smullen, smolen, to smoulder or burn in a hidden way, to send up a thick smoke, steam, dust, mist, to rain fine, Sw. smolk, dust, mote, dirt, Da. dial. smilk, fine rain, Lith. smalkas, smoke, vapour, smelkti, to smoke. Schmollen, in ordinary G., signifying a sulky silence, may be explained, as if brooding over hidden ill-will instead of hidden mirth.

The connection of the idea of covert laughter with that of smouldering, dust, dirt, smoke, holds good in a remarkable way in other instances. E. dial. to smudge, to daub, to stifle or smother, to smoulder or burn in a hidden way, is also used in the sense of smothered laughter.—Brockett. G. schmutzen, to dirty, also, as schmutzlachen, schmutzeln, schmuntzen, schmuntzeln, to smile, simper, laugh in one's sleeve. Du. smuisteren, to daub or smear, corresponds with Pl.D. smustern, smunstern, smusterlachen, to smile; as Swiss smusseln, to dabble, dirty, NE. smush, to smoulder, with Pl.D. smuschern, to laugh in a covert way. In the same way we have Manx smooir, MHG. smieren, schmierlich lachen, E. smirk, to smile, titter, parallel with E. smear, Pl.D. smoren, smorchen, smurken (Br. Wtb.), to smother, stifle, stew, Du. smeuren, smooren, to smoke (K.), E. dial. smur, fine rain.

Sw. småle, N. smaalægja, to smile, are wholly unconnected with any of the foregoing, being analogous to G. klein lachen, Fr. sourire, from små, smaa, little, small, and le, lægja, to laugh.

* To Smirch.—Besmirch. To blacken, to dirty. From mirk, dark, a root much developed in the Slavonic languages. Illyr. mêrk, dark; mêrčiti (merchiti), to blacken, befoul, dirty; smerknutise, to become dark. Pol. mrok, darkness, mroczny, murky, dusky; Serv. mrchiti, to blacken; Boh. smrkatise, to become dark. Commonly explained from the notion of smearing or daubing.

To Smirk. See Smile.

To Smite. Pl.D. smiten, G. schmeissen, to strike, to cast. Doubtless from an imitation of the sound of a blow, which is represented indifferently by the forms smack, schmatz, smat. N. smatta, to smack with the tongue; Bav. schmatzen, to smack with the tongue, to kiss, strike, let a thing fall with a sudden noise; schmitzen, to strike, to cast; G. schmitz, a lash with a whip. Sw. smiska, to lash, to dash; Bav. schmaiss, schmiss, a blow. 'Der fuhrman schmeisst mit der geisel und gibt ein schmitzen:' the carter smacks or cracks his whip and lashes his horses.—Schm.

Smith.—Smithy. ON. smiðr, artificer; smiðja, smithy, workplace; smið, workmanship, art; smiða, to construct; smiði, an object of art.

The radical sense seems to be a worker with the hammer, one who smites metal into shape. In Galla tuma is to beat or strike, to forge iron, whence tumtu, every kind of craftsman ('but the signification of strike preponderates'), especially a smith, locksmith, but also a shoemaker, tailor, &c.—Tutschek. Smock.—Smockfrock. ON. snokkr, a shirt without arms, also a sheath, or what one sticks a sword or knife into. In Heligoland smock is a woman's shirt. The meaning is a garment one creeps into or slips over one's head. ON. smokka, to stick in ; smokka sér inn, to creep into ; smokka sér úr neti, to slip out of a net ; smeygia, to slip into, to slip on ; smjuga, to creep through or into. Lith. smaigti, smeigti, to stick into, as a pole into the ground ; smaigas, a hop-pole.
Smoke. AS. smec, smeoc, G. schmauch, Du. smook, smoke. Gr. σµύχω, to burn in a smouldering fire. W. mwg, smoke, fume ; ysmwcian, a little smoke, mist, fog ; mygu, to smoke, smother, stifle. Bret. moug, (originally doubtless smoke, then) fire, family, house ; moged, smoke ; mogeden, exhalation, vapour ; mouga, to suffocate, extinguish. Gael. mùch, mùch, smùch, suffocate, smother ; mùchan, a chimney ; muig, smoke, mist, gloom ; muigeach, smoky, misty, gloomy ; Ir. mùch, smoke ; mùchaim, to smother, extinguish ; mùchna, dark, gloomy. Manx moogh, extinguish ; smoghan, stink ; smogham, a suffocating or smouldering fume.
The ultimate origin is, I believe, to be found in a representation of the nasal sounds made in sniffing an odour or in gasping for breath. From sniffing an odour we pass, on the one hand, to the idea of that which is snuffed up, exhalation, vapour, smoke ; then, from smoke being considered as the suffocating agent, to the idea of choking, suffocation ; or we may step at once to the latter conception from the figure of gasping for breath. Pl.D. snikken, to gasp for air, to sob, in Hamburgh, to be suffocated, to choke ; versnikken, to draw the last gasp, to die. The imitative form preserved in Bav. pfnechen, to pant, to breathe deep, leads, on the one hand, to Gr. πνέω, to breathe ; πνοή, a breathing, an exhalation, vapour, odour, and, on the other, to πνίγω, to stifle, choke, drown, stew ; Lat. necare, to kill ; It. annegare, to drown.
The inarticulate sounds made in muttering, sobbing, sniffling, were imitated in Gr. by the syllable μυ, which must sometimes have been strengthened by a final guttural, shown in μυχμός, groaning, μυκτήρ, the nose or snout, μύκος, snivel, the mucus of the nose, μύξα, snuff of a lamp. The same imitation gives rise to G. mucken, mucksen, Mag. mukkani, Fin. viikahtaa, to make slight inarticulate SMOTHER sounds with the mouth closed ; Gael. mùch, mutter, hum ; mugach, snuffling ; smuc, a snivel, snore, nasal sound ; smueach, snivelling, snuffling, snoring.
Hence must be explained Bav. schmecken, to sniff, to smell, to detect by smell, in the same sense as E. smoke, to find any one out, to discover anything meant to be kept secret.—Hal. Swiss erschmekkern, to smell out, to discover. AS. smeagan, smean, to investigate, consider. Bav. schmeckst eppes ? do you smell anything ? do you smoke ? do you twig ? Schmecken, a nosegay ; schmecker, a nosegay, the nose. In schmeckende bach, the sulphur springs, we see the passage from the idea of smelling to that of vapour, smoke. Devon. smeech, stench, as of a candle blown out ; obscurity in the air arising from smoke, fog, or dust.—Hal. Bav. schmecken and the equivalent Bernese, schmoke, are especially applied to the disagreeable smell of tainted meat. Das fleisch schmökt, Bav. 's Fleisch schmeckt, is schmeeked worden, would in Suffolk be rendered ' the meat is smeegy.' Bernese, ubel-, wolschmöckig, ill or well smelling. G. schmauchen, to smoke tobacco, is to be rather understood in the original sense of snuffing or inhaling than in that of making a smoke.
Smooth. AS. smethe, smooth, even, soft. The radical meaning is, pliable, from G. Schmieden, to forge or form by the hammer, leading to geschmeidig, malleable, ductile, then soft, pliant, complaisant ; Pl.D. smidig, smodig, Du. smedig, pliant, soft ; Pl.D. smödden, smödigen, Du. smijdigen, mulcere, mollire—Kil. ; Dan. smidig, limber, supple.
Smother.—Smoor. The radical image seems to be dabbling in wet and dirt, whence follow the ideas of splashing, slobbering, dirtying, spotting, of a spot, stain, separate particle of dirt or dust, thickness of air, mist, smoke, and thence suffocation, choking, extinction. Pl.D. smaddern, to dabble, meddle with dirty things, make blots in writing—Danneil ; smudden, smuddern, smuddeln, smullen, Du. smodderen, E. dial. smother, Swiss schmusseln, schmauseln, to dabble, daub, dirty ; Du. smoddig, smodderig, smodsig, Pl.D. smudderig, smuddelig, smullig, G. schmottrig, schmutzig, E. smudgy, smutty, smeared, dirty ; Pl.D. besmüddern, to besmotter, to splash with dirt ; smüdderregn (staubregn), smittregn (Schütze), Da. dial. smudskregn, mizzling rain ; Pl.D. it smuddert, E. dial. it smithers, it drizzles ; Pl.D. smudderig, smullig weder, dirty weather, moist, rainy weather ; smudder-sweet, sweat caused by close smothery weather ; Bav. schmodig, schmüdig, schmudrig, close, oppressively hot ; Du. smul, smoel weder, aura tepida, aer languidus, calor flaccidus, close, oppressive weather.—Kil. Da. smuds, Sw. smuts, spot, splash, dirt, mud ; E. smutch, smutch, smut, stain, soot, dirt ; smudge, a thick smoke, and as a verb, to stain or smear, to smoulder or burn without flame, to stifle.—Craven Gl. ; smudgy, hot and close.

As Pl.D. smuddeln contracts to smullen, so smudden melts into Du. smooren, smeuren, to exhale, smoke, suffocate, extinguish ; smoor, vapour, smoke.—Kil. ; E. dial. smoor, smore, to daub, smear, smother ; smur, small misty rain ; Westerwald schmorren, schmarren, to smoke tobacco.

The same course of development may be traced in Boh. smud, smoke, vapour, Gael. smod, dirt, dust, smut, mizzling rain ; smodan, a little spot or blemish, dirt, dust, drizzling rain, haze ; smudal, sweepings, trash ; smudan, a particle of dust, soot, smut, smoke ; smud, smuid, smoke, vapour, mist ; smuidre, smuidrich, clouds of smoke or dust, exhalation, mist ; smuidir, smuidrich, to smoke. Then in a contracted form, smùir, smiùr, bedaub, smear ; smùir, smiùir, smùrach, a blot, spot, blemish, a particle of dust, an atom, dust, ashes, dross. See Smoulder.

Smothered. See Smut.

Smouch. 1. A kiss. 'What bussing, what smouching and slabbering one another.'—Stubbs in Todd. Swiss überschmauseln, überschmussetn, to kiss over and over, to beslabber, from schmauseln, schmusseln, to dabble, dirty. Swab. schmatz, schmutz, a hearty kiss. G. schmatzen, to smack.

2. To smouch, to convey away secretly, to steal. Swiss mauchen, mucheln, mautschen, mauscheln, to enjoy delicacies in secret ; schmauchen, verschmauchen, to smouch, or secretly purloin eatables, to conceal ; maüchen, schmaüchen, verschmaüchen, G. mausen, to pilfer, steal. Sw. smussla, to do anything furtively ;—bort, to make away with privily ;—in nagotin sinficka, to slip something into his pocket ;—undan, to appropriate slily, to smouch ; Du. smuigen, to eat and drink in secret, to do anything secretly. See Smuggle.

Smoulder. Thick smoke ; to smoulder, to burn with a thick smoke, burn in a hidden way, consume away without showing the fire.

The powder sends his smoke into the cruddie skies, The smoulder stops our nose with stench, the fume offends our eyes.—Gascoigne in R.

Now the Sunne is up your smoulder is scattered.—Jewell. I smolder as wete wood doth that burneth not clere.—Palsgr.

Sometimes used in the sense of smother.

A great number of them falling with their horses and armour into a blind ditch were smouldered and pressed to death.—Hollinshed.

We have seen under Smother that Pl.D. smuddeln, to dabble, smear, dirty, passes into smullen, as smudden into smooren. Dat weder smullet, it is dirty weather ; smudderig, smuddelig, smullig, dirty, smudgy; dat ligt smullet weg, the candle gutters away. Hence Da. smul, dust ; falde hen i smul, to crumble into dust, smule, smulre, smuldre, to crumble, moulder. Pl.D. smelen, smellen, smölen, Du. smeulen, to burn slowly with a thick smoke. In E. smoulder the burning body is considered as going away in ashes and soot. In an analogous manner smudge, dirt, is in Craven used for a thick smoke or suffocating vapour ; to smudge, to smoke without flame, to smear, to stifle ; smudgy, hot or close, smothery. See Smother.

Smug. Spruce, neat ; to smug up oneself, to trim, to set oneself off to the best advantage.—B. G. schmuck, pretty, handsome, fine, neat ; schmücken, to adorn, set off, deck, trim, smug up or beautify.—Küttner. Da. smuk, pretty ; det smukke kiön, the fair sex. G. sich schmiegen, and in Bavaria schmucken, to shrink, contract, make oneself small ; geschmogen, small, contracted ; schmugelich, neat, pretty, pleasing. Neat and tight in dress is the opposite of loose, flapping, slatternly.

To Smuggle. G. schmuggeln. Da. smugle, to smuggle ; Du. smokkelen, to smuggle, sharp at play, pilfer. AS. smugan, to creep ; smygelas, holes, lurking-places ; Du. smuigen, to do anything furtively ; ter smuig, ter smuik. Da. i smug, Sw. i smyg, i mjugg, clandestinely ; smyga, to slip privily in or out of ; smyghandel, smuggling trade ; smyghål, smygvrå, a lurking-place ; ON. smeygja, to slip into, to put into. Smeygja fati yfir höfudser, to slip on a garment over one's head, to creep into it ; smjuga, to press oneself through or forwards with a creeping motion; smuga, Da. smoge, a little hole, narrow passage. The primitive sense is probably preserved in Lith. snaigti, smeigti, smegti, to stick into, whence smaigas, a hop-pole. Isismeigti, to penetrate, stick into, pier-smeigti, to stick through, pierce.

Smut. The senses of paddle, puddle, plash, splash, spatter, sputter, spot, are closely allied, and similar senses are signified by Pl.D. pladdem, plasken, G. platschen, to dabble, splash; platsen, Pl.D. plastern, plattern, to sound like a heavy shower; Sw. plottra, to blot, to scrawl; Da. plet, a spot, stain, &c. In other cases the same class of phenomena are represented by imitative forms in which the p or pl of the former class is replaced by an m. Pl.D. maddem, moddern, to dabble, paddle (Danneil), and thence Du. modder, mud; bemod-deren, to bedaub—Epkema; E. muddle, Swab. motzen, Pl.D. matschen, mantschen, to dabble, plash, daub, and with the sibilant, Pl. D. smudden, smuddern, smuddeln, smullen, to dabble, dirty; smaddem, to dabble, let wet or dirt fall about (Dann.), to blot, scribble; Sw. smattra, to crackle, sputter. Da. smadder, E. smatter, E. dial. smither, N. smitter, fragment, atom; E. smotter, to spatter, dirty; Sw. smuts, spot, splash, dirt, mud; G. schmutz, E. smut, smudge, smitch, dirt, smoke, dust; Du. smetten, Sc. smad, smot, E. smit, to mark or stain. W. ysmot, a spot; ysmotio, to spot or dapple. See Smother.

Snack.—Snap.—Snatch. A sharp sudden sound like that of the collision or breaking of hard bodies is represented by forms like knack, knock, knap, snack, snap, which thence are applied to signify any sharp sudden action, or the quality of quickness essential for the production of the noise in question. Sc. snack represents the snapping of a dog's jaws, a sudden snap, then quick, alert, agile. The swypper tuskaud hound assayis And neris fast, ay ready hym to hynt— Wyth hys wyde chaftis at hym makis ane snak. D. V. 439, 33. A snack is familiarly used in the sense of a hasty meal, a mouthful snatched or snapped up in haste. Our kind host would not let us go without taking a snatch, as they called it, which was, in truth, a very good dinner.—Boswell, Journey. The knack I learned frae an auld auntie The snackest of a' my kin.—Ramsay. In vulgar slang snack or snap is booty, share, portion, any articles out of which money can be made; ' looking out for snaps,' waiting for windfalls or odd jobs.—Modern Slang. Hence to go snacks, to go shares, to participate in the booty. The imitative character of the word is shown in Pl.D. snapps! interj. expressing quickness. Snapps! snupps! het de katte de muus weg. G. schnapps! da gieng es los; snap! there it went off. Bav. in ein'm schnipps, Du. met eenen snap, Sc. in a snap, in a crack, in a moment; snaply, quickly; Da. dial. snap, Sw. snabb, quick; Du. snapreisje, a hasty journey. A snap is a spring which closes with the sharp sound represented by the name. G. schnapps, a dram of spirits, so much as is tossed off at a swallow.

Snaffle. A bit for a horse, an implement to confine the snout, on the same principle on which Bav. schnabel is applied to an iron mask fastened on the faces of abandoned women, from Pl.D. snavel, G. schnabel, the snout. The designations of the words signifying snout are commonly taken from the sounds made by snuffing through the nose, snorting, or smacking with the jaws. Thus we have G. schnauben, schnaufen, Pl.D. snuven, to snuff; Bav. schnaben, to smack like a pig; E. dial. snabble, to eat greedily, eat with a smacking sound; snaffle, to speak through the nose, to chatter, talk nonsensically; and Du. snabbe, snebbe, snavel, snebel, Bav. schnufel, Pl.D. snuffe, a snout, beak.

Snag. A short projection, the projecting stump of a broken branch, a tooth standing alone (Hal.); snaggletoothed, having the teeth standing out. The word snag is adapted to signify a short projection, on the same principle as knag, jag, shag, cog, syllables representing a sound abruptly brought to a conclusion, and thence applied to a movement suddenly cut short, or to the figure traced out by such a movement, an abrupt projection. Gael. snag, a little audible knock, a hiccough, a wood-pecker; snaglabhair, stammer in speaking; Manx snog, nod; snig, a fillip, a smart stroke or blow. G. dial. schnacke, schnocke, to jerk the head about; schnicken, to snap, move quick.—Deutsch. Mund. III. E. dial. snug, to strike or push as an ox with his horn.

Snail. AS. snægel, snægl, snæl; Westerwald schnägel, schnal; G. schnecke, Pl.D. snigge, E. dial. snag, snig, snake, ON. snigil, N. snigjel, sniel, all apparently from Swiss schnaken, schnaaggen, to creep, go on all fours, crawl; AS. snican, to creep, as Du. slecke, a snail, from G. schleichen, to creep.
Snake, AS. snaca, ON. snakr, snokr, Da. snog, Sanscr. naga, a snake. AS. snican, to creep.
Snap. See Snack.
Snapsack. Originally, perhaps, a beggar's wallet. ON. snapa, to seek one's living; snap, scanty pasture, begged scraps. See Knapsack.
To Snape.—Sneap. To nip with cold, to check, rebuke, properly to cut short. A step-mother snapes her step-children of their food. To snape, to nip as frost does. Du. snippen, to nip. De wind snipt in't angezigt, the wind cuts one's face.
Scharp soppis of sleet and of the snyppand snaw. D. V. 200. 55.
Da. dial. sneve, snevve, to clip, cut short, to cut one's hair, to nip or dwarf with cold, to give one a reproof. At snyppe or snevve een af, to cut one short, set him down. N. snikka, to cut, also to reprimand, to put one to shame. In Suffolk the word is snip. 'The frost ha' snipt them tahnups.' Also in the sense of checking or rebuking.—Moor.
The sense of cutting short may be attained in two ways: 1. From the sharp snap of a pair of scissors, or the blow by which the cut is given; and, 2. From an abrupt movement leading to the notion of a projection or point, then to that of removing the point or stump, or reducing to a stump, as explained under Snub.
From Bav. schnauppen, snout or extremity, is formed g'schnaupet, nipped by the frost, which seems the true equivalent of E. sneaped or snaped. Bav. schneppen, schnippen, to make a short sudden movement, gives schuepp, Pl.D. snibbe, snippe, beak or point, so that even snip may be explained in the sense of cutting off the point, docking, curtailing.
Snare. ON. snara, a cord, snare, springe; Du. snare, a cord, string of a musical instrument; Fris. snar, a noose.
The designation of cord or string may be taken from the notion of twisting or turning, in two ways, viz. either from the twisting of the fibres in the formation of the string, or from the notion of its use in twisting round and entangling, or confining another object. Thus from the verbs to twist, to twine, the name of twist or twine is given to various kinds of thin cord. In the same way Sw. sno, to twist, twine, entangle; sno, string, twist; hatsno, hat-string.
The ultimate origin is the whirring sound of an object rapidly turning through the air, of which different modifications are represented by syllables framed on the vowels a, i, u, according as the sound is of a sharper or a duller nature. Pl.D. snarren, to whirr like a spinning-wheel, to grumble, mutter, to pronounce the r in the throat; G. schnarren, to make a harsh noise like that of a rattle, or a string jarring; to cry like a missel-thrush or a corn-crake; OE. to snarre, as a dogge doth under a door when he sheweth his teeth.—Palsgr. Hence, in a secondary application, ON. snara, to whirl, hurl, turn, twist. N. snara seg ihop, to snarl or twist up like thread; snara eit baand, to twist a rope.
With the other vowels we have Pl.D. snirren, to whirr like a thing whirling round, to lace, to draw a string tight; snirre, a lace, a noose. Pl.D. snurren, to whirr like a spinning-wheel, buzz like a fly, snore; Sw. snorra, to whirr, hum, and thence to spin round, to whirl; snorra, a spinning-top. G. schnur, Sw. snore, a string or lace. See next article.
To Snarl. The final l is merely an element implying continuance of action, as in Fr. miauler, to cry miau! E. kneel from knee, whirl from whirr, &c. To snarl like a dog was formerly snar, as mentioned in the last article. The term is then applied in the same way as the simpler form, to the idea of twisting, curling, entangling. To ruffle or snarl as over-twisted thread.—Cot. 'Lay in wait to snarl him in his sermons.'—Becon in Hal. Snarl, a snare—Hal.; Sc. snorl, a snare, difficulty, scrape; snurl, to ruffle, wrinkle; snurlie, knotty.
Northern blasts the ocean snurl.—Ramsay.
Pl.D. snärk'n, to snarl as thread.—Danneil. Henneberg schnarren, to shrink, to crumple up. On a similar principle to the above. Da. kurre, to coo like a dove; kurre, a knot, twist, tangle in thread.
Snast.—Snace.—Snat. The snuff of a candle; snasty, cross, snappish; snatted, snub-nosed. Parallel forms are seen in knast or gnast, the snuff or wick of a candle (emunctorium, lichinus—Pr. Pm.); Pol. knota, wick or snuff of a candle; Lith. knatas, wick; Pl.D., Da. knast, a knot in wood. The radical meaning should be a knot or tuft of fibrous material used as a wick, then the burnt portion of the wick that is snuffed off. The same equivalence of an initial sn and gn or kn is seen in snag and knag, snarl and gnarl.
To Snatch. See Snack.

To Snathe.—Snaze. NE. snathe, snaze, sned, to prune trees. Westerwald schnasen, schnaseln, ausschnaseln, Cimbr. snoazen, snozen, snoazeln, to prune, to lop trees; ON. sneis, branch or twig of tree; af-sneisa, to cut off branches, to prune; Silesian schnat, twigs, branches, lop; Bav. schnaiten, to prune, lop, hack; geschnattel, geschnaitel, E. dial. snattocks, crums, fragments, scraps.

Snead.—Sneath. The handle of a scythe, not the short projections by which it is held in the E. form of the implement, and therefore the AS. snæd, a bit, seems hardly to afford a satisfactory explanation.

To Sneak. AS. snican, to creep; snicendne wyrm (acc.), a creeping worm; Swiss schnaken, schnaaggen, schnohgen, to creep; schnage, schnaagbohne, creeping kidney-bean. Gael. snàg, snàig, to creep, crawl, sneak; snàgair, one who creeps along, a lazy fellow; Ir. snaighim, to creep or crawl.

The radical signification seems to be going along like a dog scenting his way with his nose to the ground, sniffing for victuals or what can be picked up. Fris. snücke, snöke, snickje, to sniff; Westerwald schnaticken, to sniff, to seek for victuals. E. dial. snawk, sneak, to sniff, smell; snook, snoke, to smell or search out, to pry about curiously, to look closely at anything, to lie hid. See Snook. ON. snikja, to hanker after, to spunge or seek meanly for entertainment; at snikja mutu, to sniff after bribes. The idea of meanness arises from the dog being deterred by no rebuffs when he is sniffing after food. N. Han fœ 'kje vera tykkjen so snikje skal: he must not be sensitive who would spunge, or sniff after food. The metaphor is distinctly seen in the slang term of an area sneak, one who pries into areas for what he can pick up. ON. snaka, to sniff about, then to creep or move over the surface like fire. Eldr snakadi um klæði theira: the fire crept over their clothes. Da. snage, to snuff about, rummage; snagen, prying, pilfering; snige, to convey privately; at snige sine varer ind, to smuggle in his wares; at snige sig bort, to sneak off. Tyven sneg sig ind i huset om natten, the thief sneaked into the house at night; snigvei, a secret path; snigende feber, a slow, creeping fever.

In the same way from G. schnaufen, to snuff, sniff, Westerwald schnaufer, a sly person; schnaufen gehen, to go on the sly, to go a stealing. ON. snúfa, to sniff, then (like E. snook) to go about with the head down, to sneak or skulk about. Again, ON. snefja, to scent, to ferret out, explains E. dial. sneving, sneaking; snevil, a snail. See Snee.

To Sneap. See Snape.

Sneb. See Snub.

To Sneck. To latch a door; snecket, the latch. From the clicking sound made by the latch in falling to, on which account it was also called clicket, and in Fr. loquet.

To Snee.—Snie.—Snive.—Snew. To snie with lice, to swarm or abound. ' The room was as full as it could snive!'—Mrs Baker. Snew is used by Chaucer in the same sense, where it is commonly explained as a met. from snowing.
Withoutin bake meat never was his house Of fisshe and flesshe, and that so plenteouse, It snewed in his house of mete and drink.
The true explanation is to be found in Ir. snaighim, to crawl; E. dial. sneving, sneaking; snevil, a snail.

To Sneer. Properly to snarl, to express ill-temper, to laugh scornfully. To sneer, to make wry faces; sneering match, a grinning match.—Forby. Platt-D. snarren, to mutter, grumble, snarl, Da. snarre, to snarl, growl. Fr. ricaner, to sneer, is explained by Palsgr. to snarre as a dogge doth under a door when he showeth his teeth. By Cotgrave it is understood in the sense of E. snicker, or snigger, to laugh in a suppressed way, being explained to giggle, tihy (tee-hee).
There she gave mony a nicker and sneer.
Rise up, quo' the wife, thou lazy lass, Let in thy master and his mare.
Sniggeren and sneeren, speaking contemptuously of others.—Moor.

To Sneeze. Du. niezen, G. niesen, to sneeze; nieseln, to snuffle, to speak through the nose. ON. hniosa (of cattle), to sneeze. From a representation of the sound of air driven through the nose. Da. snuse, to snuff, sniff; snuus, Gael. snaois, Sc. sneeshin, E. dial. snush, snuff.

Snell. Sc. snell, sharp, severe, piercing; properly, energetic in action, rapid.
Berinus answered snell.—Chaucer.
G. schnell. It. snello, sudden, quick, agile. G. schnall represents the sound of a snap, whence schnellen, to move with a snap, to spring or bound. Bav. schnall, a snap with the fingers, a loud sudden noise; derschnellen, to burst. — Schm. Swiss schnall, the snap of a spring or a vicious dog; im schnall, in a moment, in a snap; schnellen, to snap.

Snick.—Snook. The sound of a smart crack or blow is represented by the syllables knack, knick, knock, snack, snick, snock, the final k often changing for a g; and when the blow is given with a sharp implement, the knock becomes a hack or chop. W. cnic, cnicell, a slight rap, a pecker, anything that smacks. G. schnicken, to snap the fingers, to snip—Sanders; Sc. sneck, sneg, to cut with a sudden stroke of a sharp instrument; sneck, sneg, a cut, notch. N. snicka, to cut, to work with a knife. Flem. snoecken, to cut, lop, prune. E. dial, to snag, snig, to cut off lateral branches.—Wilbraham. In Staffordshire snig is the cut herbage of sedges, and a snigbob is a tussock of growing sedge. Sniddle, long coarse grass, stubble.—Hal. Austrian schnegern, to whittle with a knife. Gael. snagair, to carve wood. NE. snick, a notch, a cut; SE. snig, to cut, to chop.—Hal. Snock, a knock, a smart blow.—Jennings. Snotch, a notch. Manx snig, a fillip, a sharp stroke or blow; sneg, a latch.

To Snicker.—Snigger. These forms represent the broken sound of suppressed laughter, of a mare whinnying to her foal, of a horse at the approach of his corn. Sc. snocker, to snort, to breathe high through the nostrils; nicker, nicher, to neigh, to laugh in a loud and ridiculous manner.—Jam.

Snickup.—Sneckup. 1. A representation of the sound of the hiccup. A charm for the hiccup is 'Hickup, snickup, three sups in a cup are good for the hickup.' Then taking the hiccup as the type of the least possible malady, to say of a man that he has got the snickups, means rather that he fancies himself ill than that he is really so.—Forby. Du. hikken, snikken, to hickup; snikken, also to sob, to gasp. Pl.D. snikken, snukken, to sob; smikkup, slukkup, the hiccup.—Brem.

2. Sneckup or snickup is used interjectionally in the sense of begone! away with you! (Forby), as by Sir Toby Belch to Malvolio when he comes lecturing him and his companions in their drunken orgies: 'Give him money, George, and let him go snickup.' 'No, Michael, let thy father go snickup.'—Knight of Burning Pestle, B. and F. in N. The expression may perhaps be elucidated by Bav. schmeck's! an interjection used in exactly the same way, being rendered by Schmeller, I have no answer for you, that is nothing to me. The force of the word is sniff! find out for yourself! make out what you can of it! equivalent to Go look! ask about! from schmecken, to sniff, to smell. Du. snicken, E. snucke, to sniff, scent out like a dog.—Kil. See Snook. ON. snæfa, to sniff, to trace by scent; snæfaðu heðan, pack off, begone.

To Snip. To nip, snip, clip, are all formed on the same plan representing the sharp click of a pair of blades coming together in the act of snipping. Du. knippen, to snap the fingers, to give a fillip, also, as snippen, to snip or clip. G. schnippen, to crackle, to snap the fingers, fillip. Bav. in einem schnipps, in a moment; schnipfen, to snip, to sip, to pilfer.

Snipe. Du. sneppe, snephoen, G. schnepfe, snipe, a bird distinguished by the length of its bill. Pl.D. snippe, snibbe, beak, also snipe. So Fr. bec, beak, bécasse, bécassine, woodcock, snipe. Bav. schnepp, schneppen, the beak, bill, from schneppen, schneppen, to make a short quick movement; schnipfen, to pick. Du. snabben, to peck, to snap; snabbe, snebbe, beak.

To Snite.—Snot.—Snout. The designations of the mucus of the nose and of the nose itself, the snout or nose and mouth of animals, are commonly taken from a representation of the sound made in sniffing or drawing air through the nose impeded by mucus. Thus from Pl.D. snurren, snoren, to snore, we have snurre, the nose or snout, and Sw. snor, mucus of the nose. From G. schnauben, to snuff, E. dial, snob, to sob, we have snob, snot, and G. schnabel, beak, snout; from Du. snuyven, snuffen, to snuff or sniff, are derived snuyve, snof, rheuma, catarrhus, running at the nose, E. snivel, and Du. snavel, Pl.D. snuff, the nose, snout. From Pl.D. snorken, to snore, Sw. snorka, to snift, Bav. schnurkeln, to draw the air or mucus through the nose with a certain sound, to sniff, snore, snuffle, Nuremberg schnorgeln, to speak through the nose (Brem. Wtb. in snarren), Lith. snargloti, to snift, we pass to Lith. snarglys, snot, Sw. snork (properly snout), extremity. From Du. snicken, Fris. snucke, to sniff, Sc. snocker, to breathe high through the nose, to Lith. snukkis, Cimbr. snacko, Swiss schneicke, snout. From Da. snuse, to sniff, Lap. snusotet, to snite or blow the nose, to Pl.D. snuss, the snout. In the same way we have Pl.D. snotteren, to make a noise in the nose when impeded with mucus, to snifter; E. snotter, to cry, to snivel (Craven Gl.), to breathe hard through the nose, to snort.

Close by the fire his easy-chair too stands,

In which all day he snotters, nods, and yawns. Ramsay.
G. schnattern, schnadern im Kothe, to muddle like ducks in the mud ; Swab. schnudern, to dabble in mud ; Bav. schnudern, schnodeln, to draw breath through the impeded nose. ' So si den atum hart haben un schnudrent durch die nasen.'—Schm. Swiss schnudern, to snivel, to snift in crying ; Bav. schnauden, to draw breath, snort, pant. ON. snudda, snudra, Bav. schnütten, to sniff about, to search. Gael, snot, smell, snuff the wind, suspect ; snoitean, a pinch of snuff. Lap. snodkaset, to snift ; snudtjet, to sniff out, to trace by scent.
From these we pass to Bav. schnuder, schnudel, Du. snodder, snot, snut, Pl.D. snotte. Da. snat, snot, ON. snyta, snot, the mucus of the nose, and ON. snudr, Bav. schnuder, schnud, Pl.D. snute, Du. snuite, G. schnautze, the snout. G. schnäutzen, Du. snutten, snütten, Pl.D. snutten, ON. snyta, to snite, to blow the nose and cleanse it from mucus, and thence to snuff a candle, are pretty equally related both to snout and snot, and perhaps may have been developed simultaneously with those forms from the same radical image.
From Gael, snot, snuff the wind, Bav. snütten, ON. snutra, to sniff, search, may be explained Goth. snutr, AS. snotor, sagacious, prudent, an exact equivalent of Lat. sagax, keen at following the scent.
Snivel. Besides the ordinary sense of snifting, drawing up the mucus audibly through the nose, especially in crying, snivel is used in Northamptonshire in the sense of shrink, shrivel. Fruit that is over-ripe and withered is said to be snivel'd up ; flannel snivels up in washing. 'I'm so cold I could snivel into a nut-shell.'
How snivelled and old he looks.— Mrs Baker. This is one of the numerous cases in which the idea of contraction is expressed by the drawing up the nose and mouth in the act of grinning, snarling, snifting, snivelling.
A kind of cramp when the lips and nostrils are pulled and drawn awry like a dog's mouth when he snarreth.— Nomenclature, 1585, in N. Bav. schnarkeln, to snore ; schnurkeln, schnürkeln, to draw the air or mucus through the nose with a certain noise, to sniff, snore, snift, pry, shrink ; schnurkel, a wrinkled old woman ; G. schnorkel, a volute in Architecture, ON. med snerkjanda nef, with upturned nose ; snerkja, pain that makes one wry the mouth ; snorkinn, shrunk, contracted. ON. snorka, to snift, snort, grumble, scold ; snerka, to shrink. With the final guttural ex-changed for a labial, Bav. schnorfezen, schnurfeln, to snift, snifter; schnerfen, schnarpfen, schnurpfen. Da. snerpe, to contract or shrink ; snerpe munden sam-men, to purse up the mouth ; Du. snerpen, to make one smart, to pinch. NE. to snerple, to shrivel up.—Hal. Compare also Lat. ringor, to grin, to be in ill-humour, to wrinkle, shrivel.

Snob. In Suffolk a journeyman shoe-maker ; in slangish language used in the sense of a coarse vulgar person. Sc. snab, a cobbler's boy. The proper meaning of the word is simply a boy, then, like G. knappe, a journeyman or work-man, servant. E. dial. snap, a lad or servant, generally in an ironical sense.—Hal. The ultimate meaning of the word seems to be a lump of a boy. Snap, a small piece of anything (frustulum — Coles).—Hal. See Knave.

To Snook. — Snoke. To smell, to search out, pry into—Hal. ; to lie lurking for a thing.—B. ' Halener, to vent, snook, wind, smell, or search out.'—Cot. Nicto, to snoke as houndes dooth.—Ortus in Hal.
The sound of sharply drawing the breath, as in sobbing, snifting, sniffing, is represented by the syllable snik, snuk; and from the figure of sniffing the air is very generally expressed the idea of searching about, especially seeking for delicacies or eatables, prying curiously into things. Pl.D. snikken, snukken, to sob ; Du. snicken, to sob, gasp, sniff, scent out.—Kil. E. dial. sneke [a snifting], a cold in the head. Swiss schneicken, schneuggen, to sniff like dogs or pigs; schneicke, schneugge, Lith. snukkis, the nose or snout. Da. dial. snoke, to trace by scent ; at faae en snok of noget, to get wind of something ; snykke, to snuff tobacco. N. snik, smell ; snikja, to hanker after. Lap. snuogget, to scent, trace by scent like a dog, pry into ; Sw. snoka, Da. snage, ON. snaka, to snuff about, rummage, search. E. dial. snawk, sneak, snuck, to smell. Fris. snücke, snoke, snickje, to sniff.

To Snooze. To slumber, nap.—Worcester. Snoozing, nestling and dozing, lying snug and warm.—Mrs Baker. Lith. snudau, snusi, snusti, to fall asleep, to doze ; snausti, to be sleepy ; snudis, a dozer, dreamer.
The word may spring from the same origin in a representation of the sound of breathing, by two different courses, viz. 1st, direct from the deep breathing of a person in sleep, as in the case of OE. swough, Sc. souff, signifying, in the first place, breathing heavily, and then sleep. In the same way Bav. pfnausen, to breathe deep through the nose, is used exactly as E. snooze, in the sense of comfortable sleep. 'Als er einest bey nachtlichem weise in dem warmen federbett pfnauste :' as he nightly snoozed in the warm feather-bed. On the other hand, the sense may be taken from the figure of an infant sniffing after food, and pressing close to its mother's breast. Dan. snuse, to snuff, sniff, and, in a secondary sense, to sniff out, to pry ; E. dial, snowze, to pry into, to ferret about. ' Don't come snowzing after me.' —Mrs Baker. N. snuska, snusla, snutra, to sniff or pry after eatables. ON. snudda, snudda, Bav. snauden, to sniff, scent out ; E. snuddle, to nestle (Hal.) ; nuddle, to nestle, to fondle, as when a child lays its head on the bosom of its nurse ; nuzzle, to creep closely, as an infant in the bosom of its nurse or mother. — Mrs Baker. Pl.D. snusseln, to sniff after, to trace by scent ; snusselje, niceties, tit-bits ; snuss, the snout ; herumsnusseln, to pry about. Dat kind snusselt an dem titte : the child nuzzles or snuggles up to the breast. E. snoozling, nestling.—Hal. The association of the idea of seeking for food with those of warmth and sleep is derived from the earliest period of the infant's life. See Snug.

To Snore. — Snort. Snort bears the same relation to snore as snift to sniff, the addition of the final t intimating a separate act as distinguished from the continuous action of snore or sniff. ' In the snirt of a cat,' in a moment. Swiss schnodern, to snore, sniff, snort ; schnerre, Pl.D. snurre, the snout, nose ; snurren, to whirr like a spinning-wheel, to snore in sleep; snoren, snorken, G. schnarchen, Lap. snoret, snorret, to snore ; Sw. snor, mucus of the nose ; Pl.D. snirren, to whirr ; snarren, to grumble, mutter.
Snot. See Snite.
Snout. See Snite.
Snow. I. G. schnee, ON. snjóðr (snjóva, snjóða, to snow), Goth, snaivs, Pol. snjeg, Lith. snegas, Gael, sneachd, Lat. nix, nivis (ningere, to snow), Gr. νιφάς, a snowflake.
2. Pl.D. snau, a kind of ship, originally a beaked ship, from snau, beak, snout.
Snub. Snub is a word analogous to jag, jog, job, snag, &c., representing, in the first instance, a short abrupt sound, then applied to a sudden movement abruptly stopped, then an abrupt projection or stump. To snub is, then, to reduce to a stump, to cut short, as Sw. stympa, to dock or mutilate, from stump, a snag or stump.
In the sense of a short abrupt sound we may cite E. dial, snob or snub, Swiss schnupf, a sob, passing to the idea of abrupt movement in Swiss auf den schnupf, Da. i en snub, in a moment, at a blow, and in Sw. dial, snubba, snabbla, snubbla, snappla, snoppla, snuppla, to stumble. Then, as stumble and stump are connected together, we have Sc. snab, the projecting part of a rock or hill, a rough point ; E. snub, a jag or snag.
His dreadful club All armed with ragged snubs and knotty grain.
A snubnose is a stumpy nose. Sw. dial. snubba, nubba, a short tobacco pipe, a dumpy woman. Hence ON. snubba, to reduce to a stump or snub, to cut short ; snubbottr, Da. snubbed, stumpy.
The heads and boughs of trees—towards the sea are so snubbed by the winds as if the boughs had been pared or shaven off.—Ray in Todd.
Da. snubbe af, Sw. dial, snubba, to curtail, to dock ; snubba, a cow without horns ; snubbug, snubbut (of cattle), wanting horns ; snuv-örug, having short stumpy ears.
To snub or snib is then figuratively to set down or reprimand, take one up short, cut off his excuses, &c. Sw. snubba. Da. dial, snibbe, Fris. snubbe, snobbe, snope, afsnope, to set one down, as a too forward child, to give a sharp reproof; snap, snupp, ashamed, cast down. It is the same metaphor when we speak of being completely stumped, being cut short, reduced to a nonplus.
The foregoing is, I believe, the true explanation of the connection between the verb to snub or snib, and forms like Du. snabbe, snebbe, Bav. schnauppen, ON. snoppa, the snout ; otherwise there is a close analogy between a sharp reprimand and a slap in the face, blow in the chops, as shown in It. nasada, Venet. mustazzada, a rebuff, from naso, and mustazza, a snout, respectively. * Pol. buzia, the mouth ; buzować, to snub. Swiss schnautz, a rough reproof; schnautze, snout ; anschnautzen, to speak roughly to one ; Dorsetsh. snout, to snub—Hal. ; and we might be inclined to explain a snubbing as a figurative application of ON. snoppa pungr, a blow on the chops; Gloucest. snoup, a blow on the head.—Hal.

To Snudge. To snudge along, to walk looking downward and poring as though the head was full of business—B., marcher d'un air rampant et pensif.—Miege. To snudge over the fire, to keep close to it. To nudge or snudge, to hang down the head.—Mrs Baker.

The primitive meaning seems to be going along with the face bent to the earth like a dog tracing out the scent, then looking closely after, seeking greedily for, leading to the use of snudge in the sense of a miser. ON. 'snugga, snudda. Da. snuse, to sniff, snuff, search out; snugga til eines, to have hope of something. N. snuska, snusla, to sniff out, search for something to eat. From the latter sense must be explained the familiar E. nuzzle, nuddle, to creep closely or snugly, as an infant in the bosom of its mother.

She nuzzleth herself in his bosom. Stafford's Niobe.

We then pass to the idea of grovelling, going along in a dejected way with the head down. Sir Roger shook his ears and nuzzled along, well satisfied that he was doing a charitable work.—Arbuthnot in Todd. How he goes nuddling along.—Mrs Baker.

The passage from the idea of sniffing to that of a miser is shown in Du. snicken, to sniff, to scent, and Sw. snikas, to be greedy of gain; sniken, greedy, avaricious, stingy, mean.

To Snuff.—Sniff. From a representation of the sound made by drawing breath through the nose. Du. snoffen, snuffen, snuffelen, snuyven, to breathe through the nose, to trace by scent; snoffen, snuffen, to sob ; snof, scent, perception by scent ; snoeven, snuyven, to take breath ; snoff, snuff, cold in the head, running at the nose—Kil. ; Fr. renifler, nifler, to snifter, snuff up, snivel. OE. nevelynge with the nose.—Pr. Pm. G. schnauben, schnaufen, schnieben, to snuff, snort, huff, puff and blow. Emungere, snuben, snuuen de nasen.—Dief. Supp. Schnuffeln, schnüffeln, to snuffle, speak through the nose ; schnupfen, to snuff up, a cold in the head ; schnuppe, the snuff of a candle ; schnuppen, -pfen, to be offended at a thing, to snuff at it ; schnup-pen, to snivel. Pl.D. snuff, snuffe, nose, snout.

Snug.—Snuggle. To snuggle is to nestle, to lie close, like an infant pressing itself to its mother's bosom.

Betwixt them two the peeper took his nest Where snugging he well appeared content. Sidney.

Hence snug, warm and close, sheltered, concealed. The ultimate origin is the figure of snooking or sniffing after food. See Snook. Westerwald schnaucken, to sniff after eatables, to eat ; schnaucker, one who pokes his nose everywhere ; schnuckeln, to seek after delicacies, to suck at the breast ; schnuckler, a person with a lickerish tooth, an infant at the breast ; schnuckeles waare, lollipops. Bav. schnuckeln, to suck, lick, eat with pleasure ; abschnuckeln einen, to devour with kisses ; schnuckes, a darling. Sw. snugga, to play the parasite, to sponge ; snugga sig til nagot, to get a thing by fawning. See Snooze.

So. Goth. sva, AS. swa, ON. sva, svo, G. so, Fr. It. si, Lat. sic. Gael. so, this, these ; an so, here ; gu so, hither, to this place ; mar so, thus, in this manner. So ! here, see here, take this. Fr. ce, OFr. ço, Prov. aisso, so, this. Fin. se, he, that. Esthon. se, the, this ; sel kombel, sedda wisi (in this wise), sis, so. In vulgar language, a person says, ' I was that angry' for so angry, angry in that degree.

So.—Soa. A tub with two ears to carry on a stang.—B. ON. ságr, sár. Da. saa, tub, pail, bucket ; not to be confounded with Fr. seau, a bucket, formerly siel, from situla.

To Soak. To drain through or into, to imbibe or suck up, to cause to imbibe. E. dial. sock, the drainage of a farmyard ; socky, wet ; sog, a quagmire ; sagged, soaked with wet. G. and ON. sog, the sink of a ship, lowest place that receives the drainings of the ship ; soggr, wet ; G. sogen, socken (in salt works), to drip, to drain ; siekern, sickern, in Hesse sockern, to leak, trickle, soak through; Gael. silg, suck, imbibe ; sùgh, juice, sap, moisture; as a verb, suck in, drink up, drain, dry ; nan tonn, as ON. sog, the flux and reflux of the waves. Manx sooghey soo, to suck, steep, soak ; W. swg, a soak or imbibing ; swgio, to soak, to become soaked ; soch, E. sough, a sink or drain.

Soap. Du. zeep, G. seife, Lat. sapo(n), W. sebon, Gael. siabunn, siopunn, soap. Bret. soav, soa, sua, tallow ; soavon, suan, soap. Fr. suif, tallow ; savon, soap. W. swyf, scum, foam, yeast, also suet. Soap was regarded by the Latins as a Celtic invention, and therefore it is reasonable that we should look to the latter class of languages for an explanation of the name. ' Prodest et sapo. Gallorum hoc inventum, rutilandis capillis, ex sevo et cinere.'—Plin. Martial calls it Batavian scum or foam.
Et mutat Latias spuma Batava comas.

To Soar. It. sorare, to soar or hover in the air like a hawk. Fr. essorer, to air or weather, to expose to the air, and so to dry, to mount or soar up, also, being mounted, to fly down the wind.— Cot. Prov. eisaurar, essaureiar, to lift into the air, to raise. From aura, air.

To Sob. A representation of the sound.

Sober. Lat. sobrius, sober, as ebrius, drunk. No plausible explanation is offered of either.

Sobriquet. Fr. sobriquet, a nickname. Norm. bruchet, the bole of the throat, breast-bone in birds. Fouler sus l'bruchet, to seize by the throat. Hence soubriquet, sobriquet, [properly a chuck under the chin, then] a quip or cut given, a mock or flout, a jest broken on a man, [finally] a nickname.—Cot. ' Percussit super mentonem faciendo dictum le soubriquet.'—Act A.D. 1335 in Archives du Nord de la Fr. iii. 35. ' Donna deux petits coups appelés soubriquets des doigts de la main sous le menton.'—Act A.D. 1335, ibid, in Hericher Gloss. Norm. In the same way soubarbe, the part between the chin and the throat ; a check, twitch, jerk given to a horse with his bridle ; endurer une soubarbe, to endure an affront.—Cot. So also Gael. smeachar, the chin, smeachar-anachd, a taking too great a liberty with one, as taking one by the chin.

Soccage. See Sock, i.

Social.—Society. Lat. socius, a companion, fellow, mate.

Sock. I. A ploughshare.—B. Fr. soc, the coulter or share of a plough, the plough itself.—Cot. From Gael. soc, snout, beak, chin, fore part of anything, plough-share ; W. swch, snout, point ; swch aradr, swch esgid, snout of a plough (ploughshare), point of a shoe. G. sech, coulter. The plough turns up the land like the snout of a pig. For the ultimate origin of the word see Seek. Soccage, a tenure of land by inferior services in husbandry [by plough service] to be performed to the lord of the fee.—B.

2. Lat. soccus, a kind of shoe ; Du. socke, a sock, woollen covering for the feet. Prov. soc, a buskin, a wooden shoe ; soquier, a maker of sabots or wooden shoes ; Cat. soch, soc, clog ; Pied. soch, soca, socola, a clog or shoe with a wooden sole ; Ptg. socco, a wooden shoe, also, as Fr. socle, the base of a pedestal ; It. zoccolo, a clog. Fr. socque, a sock or sole of dirt cleaving to the bottom of the foot in a cloggy way.—Cot. The proper meaning of the word seems to be a clog or block, as in It. zocco, Prov. soc, soca, Fr. souche, a stock or stump of a tree ; Lang. souc, a block of wood, a hack-block. A clog or wooden shoe is, on the same principle, in Du. called block, holblock ; in G. klotzschuh, from klotz, a log ; in Gr. τλ^οίιαρον, from τλ,οκον, a stump of a tree, a log. The sense of a stump or stock is taken from the idea of a projection, an abrupt movement suddenly checked. Pl.D. suk, a syllable expressing the idea of a jog or jolt. Of a rough trotting horse they say, Dat geit jummer suk ! suck ! it goes always jog ! jog ! Sukkeln, to jog along, to stumble. A similar resemblance is seen between stump and stumble.

Socket. The base upon which a candle is fixed like a tree upon its stump. Fr. souchet, souchon, *souchette, Lang. soukete, a little stock or stump of a tree ; Fr. souche, Prov. soc, soca, stump. See last article.

Sod. Pl.D. sode, soe, Du. sode, soede, Fris. satha, a turf. Gael. sod, a turf, a clumsy person ; sodach, a robust or clumsy man ; sodair, a strong-built man ; sodag, a clout, a pillion or pannel.

Soda. Sp. soda, sosa (from Lat. salsa). Mid. Lat. salsola, seaside plants, from whose ashes soda was made.

Sodden. See Seethe.

Sofa. Arab. sofah.

Soft. Du. sacht, soft, Pl.D. sagt, G. sacht, sanft.

Soil. I. Fr. sol. It. suolo, Lat. solum, ground, soil, foundation, sole of the foot.

2. Fr. soil, sueil de sanglier, the soil of a wild boar, the mire wherein he wallows ; se souiller (of a swine), to take soil, to wallow in the mire. Da. sol, mire, mud ; Sw. sola, to wallow. Bav. solen sich (of a stag), to cool himself by wallowing in the water. To take soil, to run into the water as a deer when close pursued.—B. Soal, a dirty pond.—Hal. See next article.

To Soil.—Sully, i. Fr. souiller, It. sogliare (Fl.), ohg. solagân, mhg. siiln, solgen, Swiss siilchen, Pl.D. solen, siillen, Du. solowen, seulewen, sôlen, ON. sola, Da. sole, to daub, dirty. Swiss sulch, a stain of dirt ; G. solung, the wallowing place of swine ; It. sugliardo, filthy. ON. sulla, to paddle, dabble, mess. The proper meaning of the word is doubtless to dabble in the wet, and the primitive form is probably similar to that shown in Sc. suddill, steddle, G. sudeln, suddeln, soddeln, (Brem. Wtb.), Du. soetelen, to daub, sully, stain, from a representation of the sound of dabbling in water. Bav. suttern, sottern, to boil a-gallop, make a noise in boiling; to guggle out of a narrow-necked bottle; sutt, a puddle.

The elision of the d is palpably shown in Bav. sudeln, sul'n, to dirty, to boil (in a contemptible sense), Pl.D. smuddeln, smullen, to smear, dirty, dabble. In a similar manner Fr. mouiller, E. moil, maul, to wet, dabble, dirty, must be regarded as contracted from forms like muddle, maddle, originally imitating the sound of dabbling in the wet.

For a parallel series of similar origin see Sallow.

It is not improbable that Lat. solum belongs to the same stock with the foregoing, having originally signified mud, then ground, lowest place, foundation.

To Soil. 2. To feed cattle with green food in the stall. In Suffolk it signifies to fatten completely; soiling, the last fattening food given to fowls when they are taken up from the barn-door and cooped. —Forby. In this sense of high-fed, stalled, it is used by Shakespeare.

The fitchew nor the soiled horse goes to 't With a more ravenous appetite.—Lear.

E. dial. soul, to satisfy with food.—Hal. The origin is undoubtedly Fr. saouler, Prov. sadollar, Lat. satullo, to glut, satiate. Prov. sadol, Fr. soul. It. satollo, Lat. satur, satullus, sated, full, fatted.

It is singular that even in this last sense the word seems ultimately to spring from the same physical image of dabbling or wallowing in liquids. When once man had become acquainted with intoxicating liquors, abundance of drink would become the normal type of the highest luxury, and hence probably must be explained the figures of bathing or swimming in delight noticed under Gala.

N. sumla, to paddle, dabble, bathe, swim (Aasen), is in ON. applied to Pharaoh and his host overwhelmed by the billows of the sea. Sumladisk konungrinn—í síðvarins bylgium. Hence stiml, sumbl, drink, ale, a drinking-bout. AS. symbel, a feast, banquet, supper; symbelnys, a festival, solemnity. Tha symbelnys niæssasanges, the solemnity of the mass. From the image, then, of the splashing of liquids we pass, on the one hand, to the idea of filth and dirt, and, on the other, to that SOKE of flowing bowls, luxurious enjoyment, sated appetite.

Both branches of the metaphor are exhibited in Pl.D. smudden, smuddeln, smullen, to dabble, splash about, dirty, also to eat and drink copiously, to live luxuriously; Du. smul, gluttony; smul, smul van dranke, ebrius, obrutus vino, thoroughly drunk. — Kil. Smullen, to soil oneself; to make good cheer, to gormandise [and hence to satiate oneself]; Ik heb er van gesmuld, I have had my belly-full of it.—Bomhoff. Smullbroer, a boon companion, lickerish fellow. In the same way from forms like Sw. sudda, Pl. D. suddeln, soddeln, soetelen (Brem. Wtb.), to dabble, we pass to the contracted sölen, used in both senses. Besölen, to bedabble, to dirty, also to swill oneself with drink; sölig, drunken; sölbroer (as Du. smullbroer), sölgast, a boon companion. With these last may be compared E. swillbowl, swilltub, a drunkard; to swill, to wash or rinse, to drink copiously; swill, hog's wash, swiller (exactly equivalent to Fr. souillard), a scullion.—Hal. Sw. söla, to wallow, dabble, bedaub; also to sot, to guttle; N. sulla, satiated, drunk.

It is hard to separate the series here given from Fr. saoul, soul, sated, drunk. Soûl comme une grive, as drunk as an owl. But if the forms are truly analogous, we must suppose that the root sat, appearing in Lat. satur, satiari, satullus, was derived from a form like satullare, originally (like Pl.D. suddeln, soddeln, Du. soetelen, Bav. sottern, suttern) representing the agitation of liquid. From this source also would be explained the contracted form shown in Fr. sale, Gael. sal, dirty, Fr. salir, to dirty, E. sallow, which it is so difficult to keep apart from the series connected with Fr. souiller and E. sully.

To Sojourn. Fr. sejourner; It. soggiornare; OFr. sorjornier.—Chron. Ducs de Norm. 2. 11607. Ed uimeis od mei surjurneras.—L. des Rois.

Soke. The privilege of holding a court which the tenants of the lordship are bound to attend, or the territory over which the duty of attending the court extends. The soke of a mill is the territory over which the tenants are bound to bring their corn to be ground at a certain mill.

The word is derived from AS. socan, secan, to seek, and is equivalent to Mid.Lat. secta, Fr. suite, E. suit. Soca molendini and secta molendini are both used for the soke of a mill. Soca placitorum and secta placitorum signify the right of holding a court to which the tenants of the lordship owe suit. Sw. soka, to seek, to bring a suit at law.
Solace. Lat. solor, to console, solace, ease; solatium, It. solazzo, Fr. soulas, solace, sport, recreation. In Gael, the particles so and do are used like τῦ and δῦ in Gr. Thus from leir, sight, perception, soilleir, bright, clear; doilleir, dim, dark, obscure; solas, comfort, cheerfulness, joy; dblas, woe, grief, mourning.
Solar. Lat. sol, the sun.
Solder.—Sodder. Fr. soulder, souder, to soulder, consolidate, close or fasten together.—Cot. It. saldo, sodo, solid, firm; saldare, to fix, fasten, to stanch blood, solder metals, starch linen, gum or stiffen silks, close or heal up a wound.—Fl. Lat. solidus.
Soldier. OFr. souldart. Norm. soldar, soldier, one who receives pay. Eo son stao to soldaero.—Barsegapè (Milanese 13th cent.). It. soldo, Fr. solde, pay, hire, from solidus, Fr. sol, sou, a piece of money.
Sole. The basis of anything, floor of a mine, lower surface of the foot, of a shoe, &c. Pl.D. sale, G. sohle, Lat. solea, It. suola, Sw. sola, sàla, sole of the foot or of a shoe. Goth. sulja, sandal; stiljan, to found, to lay a foundation. W. sail, foundation, groundwork; seilgamu (camu, to step), to tread a sole away; seilddor (foundation of door), threshold; seilddar (daear, earth, ground), a foundation, pile, a prop, explaining Pl.D. sjûle, G. säule, a column, pillar. The radical signification is probably that of Lat. solum, the ground or earth, from the origin explained under Soil.
Sole. Lat. solus, only.
Solecism. Gr. σολοικισμός, a barbarism in speech; from Σόλοικοι, dwellers at Soli, a city in Cilicia, who had lost the purity of the Attic speech.
Solemn. Lat. sollemnis, solemnis, solennis, what is done every year at a certain time. Solemnia sacra dicuntur quæ certis temporibus annisque fieri solent.—Festus. It then acquired the sense of accustomed, authorised, formal. The derivation of the first syllable has been much disputed, whether from solus, only, according to the analogy of biennis, from bis, twice, and annus, or from sollo, which, according to Festus, signified all, whole, in Oscan.
Solicit. Lat. solicitus, careful, troubled, busy.
Solid. Lat. solidus, whole, entire, not hollow; solus, only, alone; Gr. ὅλος, whole, entire.
Solitary.—Solitude. Lat. solus, alone.
Sollar. An upper room of a house.—B. Properly simply a flooring, then applied to floors or stages in different parts of the house. It. solaro, sollato, a floor or ceiling; solare, a story of any building, from solare, to sole, to floor, or ceil.—Fl. OFr. solier, sollier, an upper floor, ground floor, loft. Du. solder, soller, lacunar, tabulatum, contignatio; solderen, contignare, contabulare; et in solario sive horreo condere.—Kil. Corn. soler, a stage of boards in a mine.—Dief. Bret. sol, base, foundation, beam; solier, ceiling, floor, loft.
Solstice. Lat. solstitium, midsummer or midwinter, the period at which the midday sun is stationary in the heavens, neither rising nor falling; sol, sun, and statio, standing.
Soluble.—Solution, -solve. Lat. solvo, solutum, to loosen, relax. Gr. λύω, to loosen, undo.
Some. Goth. sums, Swiss som, sum, Sw. som, somlige, Du. sommig, some. Sw. som is used as a relative particle in the sense of that, as, so.
Son. Goth., Lith. sunus, Russ. siin, Bohem. syn, Sanscr. sûnu, son. Fin. sündua, to be born; sunnuttaa, Esthon. sünnitama, to beget. Sanscr. su, to beget, to bear, bring forth; ptcple past, suta, a son; sutâ, a daughter; sûna, born, blown, budded (as a flower), a son; sunâ, a daughter.
Song. See Sing.
Songle.—Songow. A handful of gleaned corn.—B. Sc. single, s. s.—Jam. Du. sangh, sanghe, fasciculus spicarum.—Kil. Bav. sängeln, to glean; sängelbüschel, a bundle of gleaned corn. Sange, manipulus, gelima.—Gl. in Schmeller. Swab. sange, a bundle of hemp. The origin is Da. sanke, to gather, cull, glean, pick. Sanke-ax, gleanings of corn, sankebrænde, bundles of firewood, faggots. Sw. samka, samla, to collect, gather, from the particle sam, in composition equivalent to Lat. con, Gr. ἅμα; samman, together. Bav. sämen, to collect, gather. Sam. sämnat, manipulus.—Gl. in Schm.
Sonorous, -son-. Lat. sonus, a sound; sonorus, sounding. Consonant, Dissonant, &c.
Sool.—Sowl. Anything eaten with bread.—B. The butter, cheese, &c., eaten with the bread that forms the staple of a poor man's meal, is called sowling in Pembrokeshire. Edulium, Anglice, sowylle.—Nominale xv. cent., in Hal.
Kam he nevere hom hand bare, That he ne broucte bred and sowel. Havelok, 767.
Maria Egyptiaca eet in thyrty wynter Bote thre lytel loves, and love was her souel. P.P.
ON. sufl, N. swvl, Sw. sofwel. Da. suul, anything eaten with bread. Sw. sofla, to season.
The origin of the term is shown in Bret. soubinel, the sowling or sauce eaten with the brose or porridge that forms the principal part of a peasant's diet. The soubinel consists of honey, melted butter, &c., and is commonly put in a hollow in the middle of the porridge, each spoonful of which is dipped in the soubinel as it is eaten. From souba, to sop or dip.—Legonidec. Goth. supon, OHG. soffon, gasofon, to season food. Sowling is called sippersauce in Cleveland.
Soon. Goth. suns, immediately, sunsei, as soon as ; AS. sona, soon. Du. saen, immediately, soon.
Soot. Condensed smoke. Du. soet, Pl.D. sott, sud, Sw. sot, Da. sod, Gael. suith, Lith. sodis.
Probably from Du. soetelen, Pl.D. suddeln, Sw. sudda, to dabble, dirty, in the same way as the nearly synonymous smut, from Pl.D. smudden, smuddeln, in the same sense. The idea of staining or dirtying is expressed by the figure of splashing or daubing with wet, and then the name is given to soot as the most staining or dirtying material.
Sooth. ON. sannr, sadr, true, in accordance with the fact. Sanscr. sat (nom. sait, ace. santam), being, equivalent to Lat. sens, sentis in prsens; whence asat, nothing ; satya, true. When the Houyh-nyms were driven to express the idea of falsehood, new to them, they called it saying that which is not.
To Soothe. The radical meaning is to lull or calm by a monotonous sound. Goth. suthjan, to tickle the ears. AS. gasothian, to flatter. ON. suda, to hum, to buzz. Sc. south, sowth, to hum a tune, a murmuring sound.
The soft sotith of the swyre [gorge of the hills], and sound of the stremes, The sweit savour of the swairde, and singing of fovvlis. Might comfort any creature of the kyn of Adam. Dunbar in Jam.
G. sausen. Da. suse, to buzz, whizz, sound as wind or water ; einein kinde sause singen, to lull a child asleep; W. suo, to buzz, to hush, to lull.

On the same principle the word lull is derived from monotonous singing, la-la-la. Da. nynne, to hum a tune ; It. ninnare, to sing, to lull or dandle children asleep. N. hulla, lulla, sulla, to hum, to lull.
It seems to be from some hazy feeling of the physical origin of the word that it is so frequently used in the sense of calming by sound.
There is little doubt but the verse as well as the lyre of David was able to soothe the troubled spirits to repose.—Knox, Ess. in R.
Ideal sounds Soft-wafted on the zephyr's fancy'd wing. Steal tuneful soothings on the easy ear. Thomson.
The godlike man they found Pleased with the solemn harp's harmonious sound : With this he soothes his angry soul.—Pope, Iliad.
Possibly Lat. sedare may have the same origin. See Seethe.
To Sop. To dip into or soak in broth, &c. Sop, bread soaked in broth, dripping, wine, or any liquid.—B. N. sabba, svabba, subba, to paddle, dabble ; subben, soaked, wet. Goth. supon, gasupon, to season, properly to dip bread in sauce. Sw. soppa, broth, soup. N. soppa, bread and milk. Pl.D. sappen, to make a sound like water in dabbling. Idt is so vuul up'r straten dat idt sappet : it is so dirty in the streets that it splashes audibly. De schoe sappet : it squashes in one's shoe. Sappig, soppy, plashy.
Sophist. Lat. sophista, Gr. σοφιστής, from σοφίζω, to teach wisdom ; σοφός, wise.
Soporiferous. Lat. sopio, -itum, to set to sleep ; sopor, sleep.
Soprano. See Sovereign.
Sorcerer. Fr. sorcier, a wizard, properly one who divines by casting lots ; sortilege, witchcraft, divination by lot ; sort, Lat. sors, a lot. Alban. short, lot ; shortar, soothsayer, sorcerer. Fin. arpa, lot ; arpamies (mies, man), soothsayer.
Sordid. Lat. sordes, filth; sordidus, dirty, slovenly, vile.
Sore.—Sorry. ON. sár, wound, sore ; sárbeittr, very sharp ; sárkaldr, very cold, sorely cold, so cold as to be painfully felt ; sárligr, painful, sore ; sárliga, sárla, badly, hardly. N. saar, wounded, injured, sore, and in a figurative sense, painful, bitter. Eiti saar sukk, a bitter sigh ; ein saar'e graat, bitter weeping ; saart, painfully, bitterly, with painful effort. Bav. ser. Swab, seir, seer, painful, sore ; OHG. sérig, painful, suffering, sad. Sc. sare, sair, a sore, wound, pain to the mind, sorrow ; sore, painful,

Sorrowful, oppressive, severe, violent, hard ; Sc. sary, sad, sorrowful, pitiable, wretched.—Jam. E. sorry has come pretty generally to be felt as if it was the adjective of sorrow, with which, in reality, it has no etymological connection.
Sorrel. 1. Fr. sorel, the herb sorrel or sour dock ; sorel du bois, sour trefoil, wood sour [wood-sorrel].—Cot. N. sur-gras, G. sauerampfer, Gr. ὀξαλίς, from ὀξύς, sharp.
2. A horse of a mixed red colour. It. sauro, a sorrel colour of a horse. Fr. saur, sorrel of colour ; harenc saur, a red herring. Saurir les harencs, to redden herrings, to lay them on hurdles in a close room and then smoke them with dry leaves until they have gotten their sorrel hue ; saurer, to reek, to dry or make red as herrings in the smoke.—Cot.
As the sorrel stems are of a brown-red colour, strikingly conspicuous in a field of mowing-grass, the word may simply signify of the colour of sorrel. On the other hand, it may be from Pl.D. soor, dry ; OHG. sauren, soren, to dry. See Sear. The name of the colour would then be taken from that of a dried herring.
Sorrow. Goth. saurgan, to sorrow ; saurga, sorrow ; G. sorge, ON. sorg, care, sorrow, anxiety ; syrgja, to mourn. Fin. suru, grief, sorrow, care ; surua, surkua, to grieve, mourn ; surra, to be sorrowful, painful, to take care of.
Sort. Fr. sorte, Du. soorte, G. sorte, Lat. sors, sortis, lot. Sort was frequently used in the sense of a company, assemblage, as lot is in vulgar language.
There on a day as he pursued the chase, He chanced to spy a sort of shepherd grooms Playing on pipes.—F. Q.
Soss.—Souse. Soss, a mucky puddle —B. ; anything dirty or muddy, a heavy fall ; souse, a thump or blow ; a dip in the water.—Hal. Souse or soss is used to represent the sound either of a dull blow or of dabbling in the water. To souse or soss down is to sit suddenly down. To souse into the water, to plunge suddenly in. ' Sossing and possing in the durt.'—Gammer Gurton. ' Of any one that mixes slops or makes a place wet and dirty, we say in Kent, he makes a soss.'—Kennett in Hal. Sossed, saturated; sossle, to make a slop.—Hal. N. susla, to paddle, dabble. Pigs are called to their wash by the cry of suss ! suss ! To suss, to swill like a hog. It. sozzare, to defile, sully.
They soused me over head and ears in water when a boy.—Addison.
.—The rabble sous'd them for't O'er head and ears in mud and dirt.—Butler in T.
Swiss sötschen, shoes full of water which make a sousing or squishing noise at every step.
Sot. A drunkard ; to sot, to drink to excess. From drunkenness the meaning seems to have passed to drunken stupidity, folly, misconduct. Fr. sot, sottish, dull, gross, absurd, foolish, vain, lascivious. Bret. sot, sod, stupid, imbecile, coarse.
The idea of drinking to excess is in many cases expressed by the figure of paddling or washing, as in E. swill, which from signifying rinsing or washing with water is applied to inordinate drinking. Sw. söla, to dabble, wallow ; söla och supa, to sot away one's time.—Widegren. Pl. D. sölen, to dabble ; besölen, to swill, to drink oneself full ; sölig, dabbled, drunk.
Again, Pl.D. smudden, smuddeln, smullen, to dabble, paddle, daub, also to sot, to gormandise, guttle, tope, and suddeln, söd-deln, Sw. sudda, suddla, to daub, blot ; N. sulla, drunken, full. The noise made by the agitation of water, in a somewhat different manner, is represented by Pl.D. suddern, to boil with a gentle sound ; E. dial. sotter, to boil gently.
From forms like the foregoing the radical syllable sod, sot, is used in the expression of ideas connected with the dashing of liquids. Gael. sod, noise of boiling water ; E. soapsuds, water and soap beaten up together in washing ; sot, to tope, a drunkard ; Lith. sotus, G; satt, full, satiated.
Souce.—Souse. Pickle of salt, any-thing pickled, especially the ears of pigs, whence souse, the ear. To souse, to steep in pickle, to season with pickle.
Kill swine and sowse 'em, And eat 'em when we have bread. B. & F. in T.
Oil though it stink they drop by drop impart ; But souse the cabbage with a bounteous heart. Pope.
Fr. saulse, sauce, sauce.
Souchy. Du. zootje, Pl.D. soodje; water-soodje, water-souchy, perch served up in the water in which it has been boiled. Zootje, soodje, is the dim. of Pl. D. söde, soe, Du. zoo, a boiling, so much as is boiled or sodden at once. Een söe fiske, a dish of fish.
Sough. An underground -drain, w. soch, a sink or drain. ON. sog, the sink of a ship, outflow of a lake. See to Soak, to Sew, Sewer.

Soul. Goth, saivala, AS. sawel, sawl, ON. sál, G. seele, soul. Gael, saoil, think.
Sound. 1. W. sôn, noise, report, rumour; Bret, son, soun, sound, tune; Fr. son, Lat. sonus.
2. A narrow arm of the sea, properly one that can be swum over. AS. and ON. sund, swimming. He mid sunde thas ea oferfaran wolde : he would pass the river by swimming. A'in er á sundi : the river must be crossed by swimming. ON. sund, a sound or straits; N. sund, a ferry; ON. sundfugl, water-fowl; sundfær, what may be swum over. N. symja, to swim; sumd, symd, capable of swimming.
3. From the same source must be explained cod-sounds (in Shetland called soums), the swimming bladder of the cod-fish. ON. sundmagi (magi, maw or stomach), the swimming bladder.
4. G. gesund, Du. zond, gezond, Lat. sanus, sound, whole, uninjured.
To Sound. Fr. sonder, to measure the depth with a plummet. Bret, sounn, stiff, steep, upright, perpendicular. Sounn gand ar riou, stiff with cold. Sounn eo ar menez, the mountain is steep. Sound-er, uprightness, perpendicular. Sounna, to make or become upright, to stiffen. W. syth, stiff, erect, upright.
Soup.—To Sup. Fr. soupe. It. sopa, broth with bread soaked in it; also sops of bread. Mouillé comme une soupe. NE. soup, to saturate, soak; soupy, wet and swampy. ON. supa (sýp, saup, sopit), to sup up liquids, to drink. OHG. wein-sawf, wine-sop. Swiss saufen, to sup up, eat with a spoon. G. saufen, Sw. supa, Pl.D. supen, to drink copiously; söpen, to give to drink; soopje, a sip, a little drink.
Like sap, sop, sip, from the sound.
Sour. G. sauer, ON. súrr, W. sûr.
Source. Fr. source, from sourdre, Prov. sorzer. It. sorgere, to rise, spring, bubble up as water. Fr. sourgeon, a young shoot of a tree, the rising up of water in a spring.—Cot. Lat. surgere, to rise.
Souter. A cobbler. Immediately from Fr. savetier, It. ciabattiere, a cobbler, souter or clouter of old shoes.—Fl. Fr. savate. It. ciabatta, an old shoe; Sp. zapáto, a shoe; zapáto de tierra, earth or clay which sticks to the shoes. Lang. sabáto, a shoe; sabátier, a shoemaker. Fr. sabot, a wooden shoe. In the Limou-sin dialect sabot is contracted to sou; whence soutié, a maker of sabots, which may serve to illustrate the passage from savetier to E. souter. The resemblance to Lat. sutor is a curious accident, made more singular by the fact that we are brought round to the same designation from other quarters. Fin. suutari, Lap. sutar, a shoemaker, are supposed by some to be corruptions of G. schuster. They also remind us of ON. sutari, a tanner, from suta, to tan.
The origin of Sp. zapáta, as well as of Fr. sabot, appears to be a representation of the sound of the footfall. Sp. zapatázo, clapping noise of a horse's foot, noise attending a fall; zapatear, to beat time with the sole of the shoe, to strike the ground with the feet, said of rabbits when chased; zaparrazo, a violent fall attended with great noise. Prov. sabotar, to shake, to stir.
South. Du. zuid, G. süd, ON. sunnr, sudr, Sw. sunnan, söder, Da. sönden, south. There can be little doubt that the meaning of the word is, turned to the sun. Bav. sunnenhalb, sunnhalb, sunder-halb, turned towards the sun, southward; sunderwind, the south wind. Swiss sun-net-halb (on the sunny side), southwards; schatten-halb (on the shady side), north-wards.
Sovereign. Fr. souverain. It. sov-rano, soprano, uppermost, supreme. Lat. supra, above.
* Sow. AS. súgu, Du. soegh, sogh, souwe (Kil.), Pl.D. söge, G. sau, Sw. sugga, OberD. suckel, Wall. couche (Sigart), Fin. sika, Esthon. sigga, Let. cuka (tsuka), Lat. sus, sow; suada, OberD. suckel, Fr. cochon, W. soccyn, a pig.
The name seems to be taken from the cry to call the animal to its food, OberD. suck! Norfolk sug! (Hal.), Let. cuk! Wall. couche! U.S. chuk! (Bartlet).
To Sow. Goth, saian, AS. sawan, Pl.D. saden, saien, OHG. sahan, G. säen, Sw. såda, sa, Bohem. syti, Lith. seti, Lat. serere (sevi, satum, semen), W. hau, to sow; had, seed; Bret. hada, to sow.
* To Sowle.—Sole. To sowle by the ears, to lug one by the ears.
He'll go, he says, and sole the porter of Rome gates by the ears.—Coriolanus.
Du. sollen, to toss up and down, as a ship upon the waves, to toss in a blanket; jemand sollen (Fr. houspiller), to towze one, pull him about. Sol over bol, solle-bol, sol or sole over bol vallen, præcipi-tari, to tumble head over heels, q. d. solea supra caput.—Kil. Fr. sabouler, to toss, tumble with, tread under the feet, to tug or scuffle with.—Cot.
Space. Lat. spatium.
Spade.—Spud.—Spattle. G. spaten, a spade; Du. spade, spaeye, a spade, hoe; spadelken, spayken, G. spattel, a spattle or slice for mixing medicines or spreading plaisters. Spattle is also used in the sense of spud, a spade with a diminutive blade for digging weeds. N. spode, spudu, a small shovel. Gr. σπάθη, a blade. Lat. spatha, a short broad sword; spathula, spatula, a spattle. It. spada, Sp. espada, Fr. épée, a sword. It. spátola, spatella, spatula, a spattle, trowel, cook's flat scum-mer or broad slice, broad flat shovel, shoulder-blade, a broad flat lath, or splint of wood with a handle to beat flax with.—Fl. Alb. shpate, sword; shpatoule, shoulder-blade.

The primitive type of a blade or implement for digging would be a splinter of flint or piece of cleft wood, as shown in G. grabscheit, a spade, properly a shide or piece of cleft wood for digging. It is probable, then, that spade may be radically identical with Swab. spatt, speitel, Bav. speidel, spaitl, a chip, splinter, shingle. The ultimate origin may perhaps be found in forms like E. spatter, spattle, to scatter liquid in small drops; Piedm. spatare, to spatter, scatter, squander; Du. bespatten, to bespatter, bedash. The spattering of liquid by a sudden blow would afford a lively image of dashing to small fragments.

Spall.—Spell.—Spill.—Spoll. Spalls or broken pieces of stone that come off in hewing.—Nomencl. in Hal. Shivers, spals, rivings.—Fl. Spawl, a splinter.—Hal. Sc. spale, speal, a splinter, lath, chip. A splint or speal of wood or stone.—Fl. Spels, spells, chips of wood.—Hal. Spell, spill, a chip of wood for lighting a candle. Swiss spallen, to apply splints. Du. spelle (properly a splinter), a pin. It. spillo, a pin, prick, spill.—Fl. N. spile, a thin lath, a shaving; spilekorg, a chip basket; spjeld, a shive, shelf, float of a water-wheel; ON. spjall, spjald, a lath, thin board, tablet, back of a book; steinspjold, the tables of stone on which the law was written; Goth. spilda, a tablet; AS. speld, a torch, chip for lighting; E. spelt, a splinter. Chippes and spelts of wood.—Nomencl. 1585, in Hal. Gael. spealt, a splinter; spealt, cleave, split, break with force. Sw. spillra, to shiver to pieces; spillra, a splinter, shiver. Pl.D. spellern, spellen, to split.—Brem. Wtb. in v. spelje. Pl.D. spalter, a thin piece of wood; spiller, a smaller splinter, such as matches are made of; spallrig (Swiss spällig, spellig), easily cleft.—Danneil. E. spelder, a shiver or splinter. Spelder of wood, esclat.—Palsgr.

The grete schafte that was longe Alle to spildurs hit spronge.
Avowing of Arthur.
Bav. gespilderter zaun, a fence of laths. OE. spillers or spilters, the thin divisions at the top of a deer's horn.—Hal.

There is no doubt that the foregoing forms signifying a splinter or fragment are of like origin with G. spalten, Gael. spealt, to cleave, Fris. spjellen, to split (Outzen in Spille), but it would be rash to say that the noun is derived from the verb or vice versâ. The sound of a blow or of an explosion is represented by an articulate form, which is then applied either to the act of flying to pieces, or to the separate parts which are the result of the explosion. Ir. spallaim, to beat or strike; spalla, fragment of stone for walling. Gael. sgealb, the sound of a blow, a slap; as a verb, to split, dash into fragments; and again, sgealb, a splinter.

Spalles. Shoulders.—B. Spalde, spawde, a shoulder; spadebone, spawbone, spautbone, the shoulder-bone. It. spalla, OFr. espalde, Fr. épaule, Ptg. espalda, espádra, Prov. espatla, Gris. spadla, W. yspawd, shoulder.

The meaning of the word has doubtless reference to the broad shovel- or blade-like shape of the shoulder-bone. Gr. σπάθη, any broad blade, a flat strip of wood used by weavers, a spatula for stirring; σπάθη, ἡ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, costa, humerus, armus. Joannes de Janua. Lat. spatha, a sword; spathula, spatula, a spattle, or slice; Alban. shpate, sword; schpatoule, shoulder-blade. Mid.Lat. spatula, spadula, schulder, schulderbein.—Dief. Supp. Spatulosus, magnas et diffusas habens spatulas.—Joan. de Jan.

The radical meaning of spatula, as shown under Spade, is a splinter or piece of cleft wood, from a form like spatter, spattle, to scatter abroad, and a similar contraction to that from spatula to It. spalla is seen in E. spattle, spawl, to spit about. It is probable, then, that the contraction may have taken place at a very early stage of language, when the root was used in the sense of splashing about, and thus that E. spall and spill, a splinter, may be true equivalents of It. spalla. Bav. speidel, a splinter, is pronounced spei'l, spa'l.—Schm. The nasalisation of speidel gives G. spindel, while the contracted form is seen in the synonymous spille, a spindle. It is reasonable, on the same principle, to suppose that Lat. pala, a shovel, is contracted from a form corresponding to It. padella, any flat or frying pan—Fl, the root of which is preserved in Pol. padać się, to chap, crack, burst.

Span. G. spanne, It. spanna, Fr. espan, empan, the length of the outstretched thumb and fingers. G. spannen, to strain or stretch, extend, bind, fasten. Einen auf die folter spannen, to stretch one on the rack. Tücher in den rahmen spannen, to stretch cloth on the tenters.

The radical meaning of the verb to span is probably to fasten with spans, i. e. chips, splinters, or pegs. Fris. sponne, a peg or nail. In support of this deriva- tion may be cited Lap. spanes, a chip; spanestet, to peg a skin out to dry. In the same way, ON. spita, a splinter or peg; spita, to fasten with pegs, especially to stretch out a skin to dry. N. spila, spile, a splinter, chip, peg; spila, Pl.D. spilen, to stretch out, to fix open. De ogen upspilen, to open wide the eyes. Du. spalk, a splint or splinter; spalken, to support with splints, to set open. He spalkte zijne oogen op, he opened wide his eyes. Fris. spalckjen, to stretch out, to fasten on the cross.—Epkema.

To Span. To wean a child.—B. G. spanferkel, a sucking pig; spänen, to wean; AS. spana, ON. spene, a teat; spendrekkr, spenabarn, a sucking-child. Flem. spene, spenne, sponne, spunne, mother's milk. Pl.D. spennen, to wean, in other dialects to suck.— Brem. Wtb. Bav. spinn, spiinn, gespunn, gespunst, spun yarn, also mother's milk; gespunne, the breast.— Schm.

As we use the word spin to express the springing forth of a thread of liquid from a small orifice, as blood from a vein, or milk from the breast, it is probable that the milk springing from the breast was compared to the thread of yarn springing from the flax on the distaff, and from the flow of milk the name of spunn or spin was given to the breast. Spin, to stream out in a thread or small current.—Todd.

The blood out of their helmets span.—Drayton.

Span-new. See Spick and Span.

Spangle. The radical meaning seems to be to tingle, then to glitter, sparkle, on the principle by which words representing ringing sound are transferred to glittering objects. Lith. spengti, to ring, to sound; spangius, twinkling, squinting.

The twinkling spangles, the ornaments of the upper world.—Glanville in R.

A vesture—sprinkled here and there With glittering spangs that did like stars appear. F. Q.

Gael. spang, anything shining or spark- ling, any small thin plate of metal; spangach, shining, sparkling. Bav. spän- geln, to sparkle or bubble up like wine in a glass, to ornament with metal plate. To spangle was used in the sense of glitter.

Lucignolare, to shine, flare, spangle, glitter. Lucignoli, ribbands, flowers, glittering jewels, spangles, bodkin pendants. Smoghare, to shiver in pieces, to spangle or glitter as some precious stones do.—Fl.

In the application to a clasp, perhaps the snapping sound with which it shuts may also come into play. Du. spang, a stud, clasp, spangle; ON. spöng, a clasp, a plate of metal. N.Fris. spungin, to snap.—Johannson, p. 176. From the sound of a snap also must be explained the Sc. sense of the word, to leap with elastic force, to spring.—Jam.

The arrowis flaw spangand fra every stryng. D. V.

See Spank.

Spaniel. Fr. épagneul, OFr. espag- neul, espagnol—Sherwood; a Spanish dog.

Spank.—Spunli. Spank, a sounding blow with the open hand; to spank along, to move at a rapid rate; spanking, sprightly, active, large; spanky, showy, smart. W. ysponc, a smack, a jerk, skip or quick bound; ysponcio, to smack, to bound sharply. In familiar E. spunk, spirit; spunky, spirited. Pl.D. spakkern, spenkern, to run and spring about, to gallop a horse.—Brem. Wtb. Sc. spjink, a spark, a match or splinter of wood for lighting.

Spar. I. The crystallised minerals of a metallic vein. AS. spæren, spärstan, gypsum. 'Gypsum, sparchalch, gybss, oder spat.'—Vocab. A.D. 1430, in Deutsch. Mundart. G. spath, a spaad, spat, spalt or spar, a kind of leafy stone; Flusspath, fusible spath or spar.—Kütn.

2. A bar of wood. Du. sperre, sparre, a rod, stake, bar, post, beam. G. sparren, a rafter. It. sbarra, a bar, barrier, palis- ade, impediment. Gael. sparr, a joist, beam, spar, a hen-roost.

The radical sense may perhaps be an implement of thrusting. ON. sparri, a pin or stick which holds something apart from another; gomsparri, a stick which holds the mouth open, a gag; sperra, Da. sparre, a rafter, N. sparre, a prop, stake set slanting against a door or a wall, a rafter. See next article.

To Spar. 1. To shut as a door.—B. AS. sparran, to shut. G. sperren, to set open, force apart; das Maul sperren, auf-sperren, to open wide the mouth; die Thüre aufsperren, to set the door wide open. Also to shut, stop, block the way, prohibit. Sich sperren, to resist, oppose. Sw. spärra upp, to set open; spärra igen, to shut, bar, stop.

The radical image is probably exhibited in Lith. spirru, spirti, to kick, to stamp, to strike or thrust against something. Spirti i zemi, to stamp, to paw the ground. Spirtis, to rely upon, to lean upon, to bear up against; spirdyti, to stamp or kick; spardyti, to kick like a horse; atsispirti, to strive against, to set one's feet against; ispirti, to thrust in, to thrust away; paspirti, to support, to prop; uzspirti (uz, behind), to shut up, stop, barricade. ON. sperrask, to make resistance by thrusting with hands and feet. From the same source must be explained ON. spor, G. spur, footmark, the print left in the ground by the pressure of the foot.

If the foregoing view of the radical meaning of the word be correct, it will also account for the next signification, viz.

2. To spar, to practise boxing, to box in gloves, to set oneself in attitude to fight. In this sense the word is a metaphor from cock-fighting: 'when a cock is opposed to another, both having their spurs covered, to embolden them to fight.' —Todd. To spare a gamecock, to breathe him, to embolden him to fight; the fighting a cock with another to breathe him. —B. Sparing, the commencement of a cockfight by rising and striking with the heels. —Hal.

The immediate origin is Fr. esparer, to fling or yerk out with the heels, as a horse in high manège.—Cot. S'éparer (in horsemanship), to rear, to stand on the hind legs and paw the air with the fore-feet.—P. Marin in v. steigeren.

To Spare. To refrain from using, taking, or doing something. ON. spara, G. sparen, Lat. parcere, It. sparagnare, sparmiare, Fr. épargner.

Spark.—Sparkle. The meaning of these words is developed on the same plan as that of Fr. éclat, signifying in the first instance a clap or crack, an explosion, the effects of an explosion, the breaking to bits, scattering in drops or fragments, sprinkling, speckling, or throwing out rays of light and glittering.

The radical sense is shown in Lith. sprageti, Lett. sprakotei, to crackle as firewood on the fire, to rattle; sprägt, (Da. sprage, Sw. spraka, to crackle, to explode, spräcka, to crack, to break to pieces; Da. spraglet, Sw. spracklig, variegated, speckled. The E. sparkle, spark, differ from these last only in inverting the place of the liquid and vowel. E. dial. spark, to splash with dirt; sparked, variegated; sparkle, to sprinkle, scatter, disperse; sparkled, spreckled, speckled, spotted. I sprede thynges asunder or sparkell them abrode. Palsgr. Du. sparckelen, scintillare et spargere, dispergere.—Kil. Lat. spargere belongs to the same class. The exchange of the final k in the radical syllable for a p produces the parallel form shown in Fr. esparpiller (It. sparpagliare), to scatter, disparkle asunder, dishevel—Cot., OE. sparpil, to disperse. Besperpled with blood.—Mort d'Arthur. From the same root Lang. parpaliejha, Castrais parpalhefa, to twinkle as the eyes, to range from object to object, opposed to a steady look at a given object; parpalhol, It. parpaglione, a butterfly, from its fluttering flight, changing in direction at every moment.

Sparrow. Goth. sparva, ON. sporr. Da. spurre, spurv, G. Sperling.

Sparse, -sperse. Lat. spargo, sparsum, in comp. spersum, to scatter, strew. Hence Disperse, Aspersion. See Spark.

Spasm. Gr. σπασμα, a convulsion, from σπάω, to wrench.

To Spatter.—Sputter.—Spot. Du. bespatten, to splash, bespatter or bespattle. The sputtering of a candle represents the crackling noise caused by moisture in the wick exploding and spattering the grease about. Small portions of grease or dirt so thrown about constitute spots. To spattle, or bespattle, differs only in the sibilant prefix from Fr. pétiller, to crackle, sparkle. La lumière pétille, the candle sparkles or spits.—Cot. A pen sputters when it scatters or spatters about the ink with a crackling noise instead of moving smoothly over the paper. Lang. s'espatara, to spread oneself on the ground; espatara, espatarat, scattered, spattered, Fr. éparpillé. Piedm. spataré, to spatter, sprinkle, scatter. Spatter and scatter are analogous forms.

Spattle. See Spade, Spawl.

Spavin. It. spavana, Fr. espavain, esparvain, esprevain, a spavin, a cramp or convulsion of sinews in horses.—Fl.

To Spawl. To spit, to cast spittle about. Contracted from spattle, as brattle, brawl; sprattle, sprawl, &c. Spatyll, flame [phlegm], crachat.—Palsgr. Lith.

spjauditi, to spit ; spjaudalas, spattle, spawl.
* To Spawn. To spanyn as fysh.—Pr. Pm.

Explained from the analogy between the spawning of fish and the spinning of milk from the breast. Bav. spán, Du. spenne, sponne (Kil.), milk from the breast. We would doubtfully suggest It. spandere, to shed or spill.
To Spay. — Spave. To castrate a female animal. Gael. spoth, Bret. spaza, W. dyspaddu, Manx spoiy, to castrate ; fer spoiyt, Lat. spado, Gr. σπάδων, an eunuch.
To Speak. AS. spæcan, sprecan, G. sprechen, Fris. spreka, to speak. Bav. spachten, sprachten, to speak, tattle, speechify ; spacht, speech, song of birds ; whence probably specht, a woodpecker. ' Schwatzen wie ein specht ;' to chatter like a woodpecker. ' Die vögel enphiengen den tag mit suessem spacht :' the birds greeted the day with sweet song. Anspecken, concionari ; speckere, concionator, rhetor. — Gl. in Schm. ON. spekja, speech.
The connection of the word with Pl.D. spaken, Bav. spachen, spachten, to crack from drought, may be illustrated by the analogy of Sc. crack, rumour, noisy talk, familiar conversation ; cracky, talkative. A like relation may be observed between the forms sprecan, sprechen, and ON. spraka, to crackle, spraki, a rumour, report. Fá spraka af einu, to get wind of a thing.
The existence of parallel forms with and without a liquid after the initial mute is very common, as in cackle and crackle ; G. spund and Sw. sprund, a bung ; E. spout and Sw. spruta ; spruthval, the spouting whale ; G. spützen, to spit, sprützen, to spirt, sprinkle ; E. speckled and Sw. sprecklot, &c.
Speal. A splinter.—B. See Spall.
Spear. G. speer, W. ysper. See Spar.
Species. — Special. — Specify. Lat. species, outward form or figure, appearance, particular kind of things. See -spect.
Speck.—Speckle. Lith. spakas, spakelis, a drop, a speck ; spakas, a starling, from his speckled coat ; Boh. szpakas, a starling, a gray horse ; szpakowaty, grizzled, roan, gray. The origin lies in the figure of spattering with wet. Swiss verspecken, to splash with dirt ; speckig, dirty. G. spucken, Du. spicken, to spit, to scatter the saliva. It. spicchiare, to gush or spirt out, as blood out of a vein, wine out of a spigot-hole. In the same way from Pl.D. sputtern, to sputter or scatter the saliva in speaking, also to splash or squirt, Du. bespatten, to bedash, to spatter, Sw. spott, spittle, we pass to E. spot, the mark, as it were, of a drop of saliva or other wet falling on a body. We call it spitting when the rain falls in small drops. On the same principle Du. sprenckelen, to sprinkle, also to speckle, spot ; sprenckel, a spot. G. gesprenkelt, sprenklich, speckled, dappled. From Sw. spruta, G. sprützen, E. spirt, spirtle, to scatter liquid, Flem. sprietelen, to sprinkle (Kil.), G. spurzen, spürzeln, to spit (Diefenbach), may be explained Du. sproet, sproetel, a freckle ; Sc. spourtlit, sprutillit, speckled ; sprutill, a speckle.—Jam. To sparkle was (as we have seen) used in the sense of sprinkling, corresponding (with transposition of the r) with Sw. spräckla, a speckle ; spräcklot, E. dial. spreckled, speckled.
-spect.—Spectacle.—Spectre, -spic-. Lat. specio (in comp. -spicio), spectum, to behold, look, forms a very numerous class of derivatives ; specto, to look, spectaculum, a thing to be seen ; spectrum, a vision, a spectre ; speculum, a looking-glass ; species, appearance ; also the compounds, Aspect, Inspect, Respect, Conspicuous, &c.
Speculate. Lat. specula (from specio, to look), a look-out, watch-tower ; speculor, to watch, contemplate, consider diligently. See -spect.
Speed. AS. spedan, to succeed, prosper, speed, effect ; spedig, prosperous, abundant, rich ; sped, success, effect, virtue, means, goods, substance, diligence, haste. Thurh his mihta sped, by dint of his might ; thurh his mildsa sped, through virtue of his mercies. Bringe spede us, bring us assistance. On thas woruld-speda, on these worldly goods. Spedum miclum, with much zeal. Pl.D. spoden, spöden, to haste. OHG. spuon, spuoan, to succeed ; gaspuon, to happen ; spuat, prosperity, success, quickness ; in spuote, in brevi tempore ; gaspuat, substantia ; framspuat, prosperitas. Bohem. spěch, haste, success, fortune ; spěchati, spessiti, to haste ; Pol. spieszyć, to hasten ; spieszny, hasty, speedy ; Russ. speshit, to haste. Lap. spaites, quick, rapid ; spaitet, to hasten. Gr. σπεύδω, to hasten ; σπουδή, diligence, zeal, haste.
Spelk. A thin chip frequently used for lighting candles. To spelk, to apply splints.—Craven Gl. ON. spjalk, spelka.

spilka, a peg. Sw. spíðle, spíðlke, a splint, splinter, round of a ladder. Du. spalke, a splint. Spelt and spelk may originally represent the crack of things splitting. Pl.D. spalk, noise, racket ; Gael. spealg, spealt, cleave, split, break with violence, fall into pieces or splinters. E. dial. spelch, split, as spelched peas.—Pegge. See Spall.
Spell.—Spill. The radical meaning of the word, as shown under Spall, is a splinter or fragment, of which several special applications may be noted. 1. Spill, a thin slip of wood, and in later times, of paper, for lighting candles. From this source may perhaps be explained G. spiel, play, as originally signifying drawing lots made of straws or splinters. The word spielen is still used in this sense in some parts of Germany.—Westerw. Idiot. In Bavaria it is applied to drawing lots for the conscription.—Schm.
2. Spell, a turn, a job ; spill, quantity, lot.—Hal. To do a spell of work, to work by turns ; to give a spell, to be ready to work in such a one's room ; fresh spell, when the rowers are relieved with another gang.—B. The sense, like that of job, is a portion or separate piece. ON. spilda, a piece of anything, as of meat, of land ; Pl.D. spal, spall, a certain portion of land.
3. To spell, to tell the letters of a word one by one, pointing them out with a spill or splinter of wood. Lang, toco, la touche, bûchette dont les enfans se servent pour toucher les lettres qu'ils épellent.—Dict. Lang. Butza, petite bûchette de bois ou de baleine dont l'enfant se sert en épelant pour suivre et indiquer les lettres.—Gloss. du Pat. de la Suisse Romaine. Festue, to spell with, festeu.—Palsgr. In Yorkshire it is called to spelder, from spelder or spilder, a splinter.—Hal. Fris. spjeald, a splinter ; letterspjealding, spelling ; Du. spell, a splinter ; spellen, to spell.
4. Spell in Gospel is an entirely different word. AS. spell, ON. spjall, discourse, relation, rumour, language. Tha ongan he secgan spell, then he began to make a speech. Ealdra cwena spell, old wives' fables. He thas boc hæfde of Lædene to Engliscum spell gewende, he turned this book from Latin into the English language. Spellian, Goth. spillon, to announce, relate, declare. The words signifying talking are so generally taken from the sound of the agitation of water, that it is plausible to derive spell, discourse, from the same root with Sw. spola, G. spülen, to dash or wash, and E. spill, to shed liquid, in the same way that ON. skol, skvol, tattle, chatter, skola, to tattle, are from a figurative application of skola, to rinse or wash, Sw. squal, splash, gush. There are many other cases in which terms signifying in the first place tattle or babble, are subsequently applied to serious talk.
5. A magic spell is commonly explained as equivalent to incantation ; a form of words by the recitation (AS. spellian, to recite) of which magical effects were produced. It was by charms of such a nature that Circe worked. Carminibus Circe socios mutavit Ulyssis. Virg. Ecl. And Boethius attributes the transformation to ' tacta carmine pocula.' In the corresponding passage of Alfred's paraphrase it is said : ' Tha ongunnon lease men wyrcan spell,' then began bad men to work spells.
—sparse. See Sparse.
To Spew. AS. spiwan, Du. spouwen, spugen, to spit, vomit ; Goth. speiwan, G. speien, Lith. spjauditi, spjauti, Lat. spuere, Gr. πτύω, to spit.
Sphere. Gr. σφαῖρα, Lat. sphæra.
Spice. Fr. épices. It. spezie, spices. Spyce, a kynde, espèce.—Palsgr. Lat. species, kinds, was used at a later period for kinds of goods or produce in general ; species annonariæ, agricultural produce. ' Equos quoque ejus, aurum argentumque, sive species quas meliores habebat, pariter auferentes.'—Greg. Turon. in Duc. The term was then applied to spices as the most valuable kinds of merchandise. ' Adde et aromaticas species quas mittit Eous.' In the same way Cat. generos, kinds, is applied to kinds of merchandise, wares ; generos, mercaderias, mercium genera.—Esteve. Dic. Cat. ' Tabaco, cacao y altres generos de America.'
Spick and Span.—Span-new. Du. spelleniew, spikspelderniew, Sw. spillerný, ON. spánnýr. Da. splinterny, all, as well as the E. terms, signify fresh from the hands of the workman, fresh cut from the block, chip and splinter new. ON. spann, sponn, G. span, a chip, splinter, fragment ; hobelspäne, shavings ; sagespäne, saw-dust ; leuchtspäne, matches. The Du. spelle and spelder correspond to E. spill, spilder, Sw. spillra, a splinter. N. spik, a chip, splinter, match. See Spike. The same metaphor is used to express absolute nakedness ; Sw. spillernaken,

Da. splinternøgen, Pl.D. splinternackend, naked as a thing comes from the hands of the maker.
Spider. Du. spinne, spinnekobbe, -koppe (Kil.), G. spinne, Sw. spinnel, E. dial. spinner. 'Addercop or spiners web, araignée.'—Palsgr. When the sound of n and r come together there is a tendency to replace the n by d, as in ON. maðr for mannr, man ; duðr for dunr, clang.

Spiggot.—Spiddock: A peg to stop the vent-hole of a cask, or the pipe of a faucet. It. spigo, a spigot or quill.—Fl. W. yspig, a spike, spine ; pigo, yspigo, to prick ; yspigod, a spiggot, spindle ; pigoden, a prickle. Bav. spickel, a wedge, a pointed or tapering portion.
The E. dial. spiddock, Manx spyttog, is not to be considered as a corruption of spigot, but as formed in a similar manner from the parallel root spid, spit, signifying splinter. Bav. speidel, a chip, splinter; also, as speigel, spettel, spittel, a gore or pointed strip of cloth ; Swab. speidel, speigel, a wedge, or wedge-shaped portion of bread, meat, cloth, &c. ; speitel, a splinter. W. pid, pig, a tapering point. See Spile.

Spike.—Spoke. Sw. spik, a nail. N. spik, a splinter, a match ; leggspik, the shin-bone ; handspik, a handspike, lever. Pl.D. speke, G. speiche. It. spica, spiga, the spoke of a wheel. Manx speek, a peak, a spire; yspig, a point, prick ; yspig, a spike, a spine.
The primitive sense is a splinter, from whence the term is transferred to anything pointed or tapering, as in Lat. spica, an ear of corn ; spiculum, a point, a sting.
The origin of the word seems to be a representation of the crack of an explosion. Pol. pękać, to crack, crackle, burst, split ; spękać się, to split ; Russ. pukat', to burst with a crack ; It. spaccare, spacchiare, to crack or break, to burst, cleave, split in sunder ; Pl.D. spaken, verspaken, Bav. spachen, spachten, to crack with drought, to become leaky ; spachen, spachten, chips, shides, firewood. Swiss spicken, to snap, to fillip ; specken, spiggelen, to split wood, to splinter ; spiggel, a splinter.

Spile. The vent-peg of a cask. It. spillo, a pin, prick, thorn, a spigot or gimlet, also a hole made in a piece of wine with a gimlet or drawing-quill ; spina, a spigot, quill, gimlet, or tap to broach or pierce a barrel.—Fl. Spinare, Venet. spilare, to spile a cask, to bore a hole for a peg in order to let in the air. See Spigot, Spill.

Spill. Splinter, chip, fragment of

SPINDLE paper used as chips for lighting candles. 'Spils or chips of the tree.' 'Spils of broken and shivered bone.'—Holland, Pliny. It is used by Spenser in the sense of a slice of ivory for inlaying.
Though all the pillars of the one were gilt And all the others pavement were with ivory spilt.
ON. spjald, spil, a tablet or thin piece of board, applied to the cedar wainscoting with which Solomon covered the walls of the temple.
Spill in the sense of splinter or fragment seems to be ultimately identical with spill, to shed liquid, on the same principle that shed itself is connected with shide, a splinter of wood.
The dashing or spattering of liquids affords a lively type of the act of scattering in fragments, and Sw. skölja, N. skvala, skola, skylja, to sound like water in a flask, to wash, gush, dash, may thus indicate the origin of It. scagliare, to shiver or splitter, and thence of scaglia, Fr. esquaille, esqualle, escale, a scale or splinter ; esguille, a little scale, a splint.—Cot.
The same relation holds good between splatter, splutter, to splash, and splitter, splinter, a shiver; between Fr. flatir, to dash water, and E. flitter, flinder, a shiver; between E. slatter, to splash, and Fr. esclat, a shiver.

To Spill. To shed liquid, and figuratively, to waste, to destroy.
And gaf them sonde at wille in Inglond for to fare, Man and beste to spille, non ne suld thei spare. R. Brunne, p. 114.
Pl.D. spillen, to shed, spill, waste, spoil; N. spilla, to gush, flow, spill, waste, throw away. Han spille tied, it pours with rain; te spilles, to waste.
G. spülen, Sw. spola, to wash or rinse. Sjön spolade öfwer däcket, the sea washed over the deck.
The word probably represents, in the first instance, the sound of the dashing of water, from a root parallel with Sw. squal, noise made by the dash of water, gush, flow ; squala, skölja, Da. skylle, to wash, rinse, pour, gush.
Compare N. spilleregn and Da. skylregn, Sw. squalregn, a drenching shower.

To Spin. ON. spinna, Da. spinde, G. spinnen. See Spindle.

Spindle. The pin or thin rod formerly used in spinning, for twisting the fibres drawn from the distaff. The thread was fastened in a slit at the upper end of the spindle, and at the other end was a whorl or round weight for keeping up the circular movement. Hence the application of the name to any axis of revolution, as the axis of a wheel, of a capstan. In another point of view it was taken as the type of anything long and slender, as in spindleshanks. To spindle, among gardeners, to put forth a long and slender stalk.—B. In G. the name of spindeln is given to the pointed lime-twigs of the fowler. In spindelbaum, the spindletree or prickwood, Euonymus Europeus, a shrub of which skewers were made, it has the sense of skewer. Pl.D. spindel, a knitting-needle. The radical meaning of the word is simply a splinter, and the act of spinning seems to take its name from being performed by means of a spindle, instead of vice versa. Spindel is a nasalised form of Bav. speidel. Swab. speitel, a splinter, analogous to E. shinder, shider, flinder, flitter, splinter, splitter, all in the sense of shiver, fragment. It is a parallel form with G. schindel, a splint, splinter for a broken limb, shingle or cleft plate of wood for covering roofs, and is connected with Lat. spina, a thorn, and G. span, a chip, just as schindel is connected with schiene, a splint or thin plate of wood or metal, E. shin, the sharp-edged bone of the leg. This constant parallelism between forms beginning with sp and sk or sh is explained by instances like E. spatter and scatter, Piedm. spataré, to spill, spatter, scatter, spread, It. scaterare, to scatter; where the endeavour to represent a rattling sound is equally satisfied with either initial.

Spine.—Spinach. Lat. spina, a thorn, prickle ; spinacia, whence It. spinace, the prickly plant.
-spire. — Spirit. Lat. spirare, to breathe, spiritus, breath, the soul or life. Inspire, Conspire, Respiration, &c.
Spire. A steeple that tapers by degrees and ends in a sharp point ; to spire, to grow up into an ear as corn does.—B.
Spire, the sharp seed-leaf of corn that springs from the ground.
Out of this ground must come the spire, that, by processe of tyme shall in greatnesse sprede to have branches and blossomes.—Chaucer.
Spyre of corne, barbe du bléd.
I spyer as corne dothe whan it begynneth to waxe rype, je espie.—Palsgr.
Spire, a stake, a young tree, the sharp leaves of flags.—Hal. Sw. spira, a rod, lath, sceptre, yard or spar of a vessel, top, point, spire or pointed steeple ; also bud, shoot, sprout ; Da. spire, germ, sprout, to germinate, to sprout ; spirekaal, sprouts from the old stock of a cabbage ; spür, boom, spar, spire ; spürtaarn, a steeple.
N. spir, point, top, ray of a crown, spirt or little stream of liquid shooting forth ; spira, to shoot up, to spirt, stream, spring forth. Bav. sporl, a pin, leaf of fir. Sporle, acicula.—Gl. in Schm.
The radical sense is perhaps a splinter, which is frequently taken as a type of anything thin and pointed. It may be a contraction from Sw. spillra, Pl.D. spiller, a splinter, whence spillern, to spindle or spire up, to shoot up into slender growth. The original sense would then be preserved in Pl.D. spîr, spîrken, a crumb or shiver (of bread, cheese, &c.)—Danneil.
Spirt. See Spurt.
Spit. Du. spit, spet, a spit ; spiet, spiesse, spietse, a pike, spear. ON. spita, a little piece of wood, peg, skewer, &c. N. spyta, a spit, a thin pointed nail, a knitting-needle ; spita, to become pointed. Sw. speta, a little rod ; spets, a point, extremity. Da. spid, a spit ; spids, point, tip, end ; pointed, peaked ; spyd, a lance or spear ; spydig, sharp. It. spito, spedo, spiedo, a spit, a spear. OHG. spiz, a spit, a pike, point ; G. spiess, any slender-pointed object, a spit, a pike. W. yspyddu, to jut out ; yspyddaid, prickly, sharp. A spit of sand is a tapering point running out into the sea ; spitter, spittart, a young stag with simple pointed horns.
The type from whence the designation was originally taken seems to have been a splinter of wood, designated on the principle explained under Spade, an object of finer point and narrower shape being indicated by the thin vowel in spit as compared with the broader a in spattle, spade. That there is no distinct line, however, to be drawn between the two conceptions is shown by E. dial. spit, a spade (Hal.), or spadegraft, the portion of earth taken up by the spade at once ; Du. spitten, to dig. The It. schidone, schidione, a spit, is the augmentative of a form corresponding to E. shide, G. scheit, a splinter or cleft piece of wood, which constitutes also the latter element in G. grabscheit (digging shide), a spade.
It. spezzare, to break, split, shiver in pieces, must not be considered as formed from dis- and pezza, pezzo, a piece, but as bearing the same relation to G. platzen, to crack or fly in pieces, which spatter does to splutter, and must be regarded as a direct representation of natural sound, along with Fr. patatras, crash of falling objects, pétiller, to crackle, péter, to crack or explode, Piedm. spataré, to scatter, spatter.
Spit.—Spittle. OE. spattle, spottle, spittle ; AS. spætan, Sw. spotta, ON. spyta, N. sputta, Da. spytte, G. spützen, Lat.

sputare, Gr. πτύειν, to spit; Du. spuyten, to spit, to spout.
Pl.D. sputtern, N. sputra, to spirt or sputter; Piedm. spatari, E. spatter, sputter, or with a formative l instead of r, spottle, to splash or dirty (Hal.), bespattle, to splash, represent the sound in spitting or scattering drops of liquid.
Spite. The somewhat antiquated equi- valent despite leads us at once to Fr. despit, It. dispetto, Prov. despieit, despieg, Sp. despecho, displeasure, malice, anger; Lat. despectus, contempt. En depit de, in spite of.
On the other hand, we have Du. spiit, Pl.D. spiet, vexation, jeering, spite. Dat spijt my, it irks me. Di to 'm spiet, in spite of you; spiet sines bardes, in spite of his teeth. N. spit, vexation, annoy- ance, derision, affront; spiten, spitig, de- risive, irritating; Da. spydig, sharp, sar- castic, caustic. Now it is not easy to see how a word of this nature should have been imported from Latin into the retired Norwegian dialect, while two plausible derivations occur in native ground. In the first place, we have seen the root spit used in the designation of any pointed object, and hence spite may have the sense of pricking, irritation, analogous to Fr. piquer, to prick, nettle, sting, pro- voke, taunt, vex; pique, vexation, quarrel, grudge; or to G. stickeln, to prick, and figuratively to jeer, scoff, taunt. G. spitzig, pointed, and figuratively, sharp, satirical, offensive.
Again, the feelings of disgust, dislike, contempt, find natural expression in the act of spitting, whence Sw. spott, spittle, signifies also affront, contempt, derision. Gawaine Douglas, expressing his vexation at the way in which Virgil's language is spoilt in Caxton's translation, says : His ornate goldin verses mare than gylt I spat for disspite to se thame spylte By sic ane wicht.—5. 44.
On this principle E. pet, a fit of anger, has been explained from the interjection Da. pyt! Norman pet! equivalent to E. tut! pish! pshaw! expressing a con- temptuous blurt with the lips which ulti- mately represents the act of spitting. And as It. petto is explained by Florio, a blurt, petteggiare, pettachiare, to blurt with the mouth or lips, it is quite possible that this may be the figure by which dis- petto comes to signify displeasure, and not from the calmer sense of Lat. despec- tus. Thus spite and despite would ulti- mately be derived from the same source without supposing any direct connection between Fr. despit and N. spit, Pl.D. spiet.
Splash. The sound of dashing water is represented by the syllable plad, plat, plash, splash. G. pladdern, Sw. plaska. Champ. platrouiller, to paddle, dabble; G. platzregn, a dashing shower; Da. pladse, to shower down; pladske, to dab- ble, splash. E. splotch, a splash of dirt; splitter-splatter, splashy dirt.—Hal.
Spleen.—Splenetic. Gr. σπλην, Lat. splen.
Splendid.—Splendour. Lat. splendeo, to shine brightly.
To Splice. Du. splissen, Sw. splissa, G. splissen, splitzen, to join together so that the two ends shall interlace or over- lap. Probably to join so that the imple- ment shall appear as if split. G. spleis- sen, to split, to cleave; spliss, a cleft, slit.
Splint.—Splinter. Splinter, and thence splint, is a nasalised form of splitter, in the same way that we have flitters and flinders, pieces, fragments. G. splint, a pin or peg; splintchen, a little shiver or splitter of wood.—Küttn. See Split.
Splinter-bar. The bar to which a horse is harnessed in drawing. Written springtreebar by Serenius; spintree-bar in Wiseman's Surgical Treatises, p. 397, cited in N. & Q., March 10, 1860. Doubtless from G. spannen, to fasten; Du. aanspannen, voorspannen, to put the horses to a carriage. Fr. atteler, to spang, yoke or fasten horses to a chariot, plough, cart, &c.—Cot. The word was then originally spangtree, corrupted to spin- tree, springtree, spintree-bar, splinter-bar.
To Split.—Splitter. OHG. splizen, Du. splitten, splijten, G. spleissen, to split; Bav. spleissen, schleissen, a match, splinter for lighting. Pl.D. spliten, to split, strip; sputtern, to shiver to pieces. The sound made by dashing liquid is represented by the expression splitter-splatter, splashy dirt.—Hal. To splutter is to scatter drops about in speaking or in writing with an ill-made pen. Splatter-dashes or spatter-dashes are coverings for the legs to keep off the splashes of mud. Thus splitter expresses the idea of scattering abroad, in the first place, drops of liquid, and then fragments of a solid object, and thence comes to signify a shiver or splinter. Sw. splittra, to shiver, splinter; splittra sig, to fly to pieces, explode; splittra, splitter, a shiver, splinter. G. platzen, to crack, snap, split, break to pieces.
To Spoil. I. To spoil or despoil, from Fr. despouiller, Lat. spoliare, to take the spoil or plunder.

2. In the sense of waste, make useless, go to ruin, the word is a broad pronun-ciation of spill, to shed liquids, and thence to waste.
Spoke. See Spike.
Sponsor, -sponse. Lat. *spondeo, sponsum,* to be surety for another ; *re-spondeo,* to answer. The origin of the word seems to have been the custom of sanctioning an engagement by a sacrifice or libation to the gods. Gr. *σπένδω,* to pour out a drink offering ; *σπονδή,* a drink offering, libation ; pl. *σπονδαί,* a treaty or truce.
Spontaneous. Lat. *spontaneus ; sponte,* of one's own free will.
Spoon. AS. *spon,* G. *span,* Sw. *spån,* a chip ; ON. *spánn, spónn,* chip, splinter, fragment, also a spoon, originally a chip of wood for supping up liquid. Du. *spaen,* a chip, a spoon ; *schuymspaen,* a scum-mer.—Kil.
Probably Lat. *spina* is a parallel form with transference of the sense from a splinter to a thorn. The final *n* seems to stand in the place of an original *d* or *t,* first strengthened, and then supplanted by an intrusive *n.* From an equivalent of E. *spatter,* to scatter, we have derived Du. *spadel,* G. *spatel,* a spatula or thin slice of wood ; Bav. *speidel, speitel,* a splinter, as well as the nasalised *spindle* of the same original sense.
The nasalised form is also exhibited in Sw. *spånta,* to cleave, to split ; *spint,* a splint or snip ; *spinta sönder,* to cleave into splinters, to cut to pieces ; It. *spon-tone* (properly a large shiver or splinter), a pike, a goad, a hunter's staff tipped with iron, a long bodkin, the prick or sting of a serpent or wasp—Fl. ; in Milanese, a needle or spindle—Diez ; G. *spund,* a bung or thick peg to stop a cask.
The growth of a *d* after final *n* is seen in the vulgar pronunciation *gownd* for *gown,* and the passage in the opposite direction from *nd* to a simple *n* is equally easy. The same change of sound from *d* to *n* is also found in the parallel series *shide, shidder, shinder, shindle* a shiver or splinter, G. *schiene,* a scale or thin plate.
Sport.—Disport. Sport or amuse-ment, OFr. *desport, deport,* is properly diversion, which is resorted to in order to divert the thoughts from the serious busi-ness and sorrows of life.
Amors l'avoit fait à ses mains Por les fins amans conforter Et por les maulx miex deporter.—R. R. 1866.
Qu'il soit distreint par touz sez biens et chateux—et ceo de jour en jour, *sans nulle* disport avere [without having any remis-sion] ou nulle mainprise trovere.—Lib. Alb. i. 474.
It. *disporto, diporto,* disport, solace.—Fl. On the same principle OFr. *desduire, deduir* (from Lat. *deducere*), se distraire du travail, to divert, withdraw from work or occupation ; *deduit,* pastime, recrea-tion.
Spot. E. *patter* represents the rattling sound of raindrops or hail; *spatter, sput-ter,* the scattering abroad of drops of liquid or mud. Du. *spatten, bespatten,* to bespatter or splash ; *spat,* a drop of what is splashed, or the spot or mark which it leaves.
Spouse.—Espouse. Lat. *spondeo, sponsum,* to engage, betroth ; *sponsus, -a* (It. *sposo, -a* ; Fr. *espous, époux, spouse*), an affianced man or woman, a new-mar-ried man or woman, a spouse. See Sponsor.
Spout. N. *sputra,* to keep spitting, to sputter, to spirt, squirt, spout ; *sputr,* a stream of liquid squirted out ; *sputta,* to spit ; Du. *spuyten,* to spit, to spout. From signifying a gush of water, spout is applied to the pipe or mouth from whence it is ejected.
Sprag.—Sprack. Quick, lively, active.—Hal. A springy, elastic way of doing things is typified by the sound of a crack. Dan. *sprække,* to crack, to burst ; Sw. *spricka,* to crack, burst, split, spring, sprout. ON. *sprækr,* brisk, fiery ; *sparkr,* brisk, lively. Pol. *szparki,* quick, lively. A spark is a brisk young man.
On the same principle, E. *sprunt,* lively, active, brisk—B., may be compared with *sprunk,* to crack or split.—Hal. To *sprunt,* to spring. See Spruce.
Sprain. Fr. *espreindre,* to press, wring, strain, squeeze out, thrust together. From Lat. *exprimere.*
Sprat. A small fish considered as the fry of the herring. Du. *sprot, pullus, germen* (a sprout), *sarda pisciculus, vel harengæ soboles sive halecis pullus ut quidam putant : Angl. sprat, sprot.—Kil.*
To Sprawl. Fris. *sprawle,* Da. *spralde, spralle,* to toss about the limbs ; *at giöre spræld,* to make a fuss, cut a dash. Somer-set, *sprawl,* motion, movement ; Devon. *sproil,* liveliness.—Hal.
One of the numerous cases in which a broken confused sound is used to repre-sent multifarious movement. We may cite AS. *brastlian,* to crash, crackle, roar like flame ; G. *prasseln,* to crackle ; Sw.

prassla, to rustle, also to be in continual movement, to wag the tail, to flounder like a fish out of water, to kick like an infant, &c.; sprassla, to crackle, spratila, spralla, to throw the limbs about, to sprawl; OHG. sprazalon, spratalon, pal- pitare, micare ; NE. sprottle, to struggle. Then with inversion of the liquid and vowel, as before in the case of sparkle, Du. spartelen, to sprawl, frisk, flutter, wag one's legs, sparkle as wine.—Bomhoff.

ON. sprokla, sprikla, to sprawl or throw about the limbs, E. dial. sprackle, to climb (to get on by the action of hands and feet), are analogous forms from the representation of crackling sound mentioned under Spark.

Spray. This word is used in two senses, viz. : scattered drops of water dashed into the air, and twigs or shoots of trees. The idea from whence both significations are developed is that of bursting open, springing forth, scattering abroad.

The ultimate root is the representation of a crackling noise, as by Swiss spratzelen, to crackle, Bav. spratzeln, to sputter like a pen in writing, to crack, burst (vor leid zerspratzen, of the heart, to burst with grief—Schm.) ; It. sprazzare, to shower down as water upon stones, to dash or bespirt, to roar and rage as the sea ; sprizzare, spruzzare, G. spritzen, to spirt, spatter, Sw. sprätta, to sputter like a pen, to scatter ; sprätta upp i luften, to throw up into the air ; spritta, to crackle like salt in the fire, to spirt, to start ; G. sprudeln, to sputter, to spout or spurt out, to emit moisture by small flying drops ; OHG. anspradern, to sprinkle (Schm.), E. dial. spraid, to spatter, to sprinkle ; Da. sprede, to scatter, to spread. The final d is softened down in spray in the same way as in Pl.D. spredeii, spreen, to spread, or in G. sprudeln, sprühen, to sputter, to sparkle or cast forth anything in a flow of small particles, to drizzle.

The close connection between the idea of the springing forth of waters and the bursting forth of vegetation is shown by the use of the word spring in both senses.

To sprout, also, as a tree, is the same word with Sw. spruta, to spout, and with E. spurt. Bav. sprutzen signifies both to sprout like a shrub, and to spurt or sprinkle. The immediate antecedent of spray in the sense of twig is shown in OHG. sprad, frutex ; spreid, sarmentum, frutices, frutecta, arbutus ; gespraide, arbusta. — Graff. Pl.D. sprate, spratel, a sprout. Lith. sprogti, to crack, to split.

SPRING also to sprout or shoot as a tree ; sproga, a spray or shoot of a tree.

To Spread. Du. spreeden, spreyden, G. spreiten, Sw. sprida. Da. sprede, to spread, to scatter. OFr. espardre, espartir, to scatter, spread abroad.

The sound of a heavy shower or of the dashing of the waves is represented by It. sprazzo (Fl.), while a less violent action is signified by spruzzare, to sprinkle, spruzzolare, to drizzle. In a similar manner are formed Swiss spratzeln, to crackle, spreitzen, spreissen, to spirt, sprinkle water, to rain ; Bav. spratzeln, to sputter like a pen in writing ; zerspratzen, to burst asunder ; Sw. sprätta, to sputter like a pen, to scatter abroad, spread manure, or the like; spritta, to crackle like salt in the fire, to spirt, to start ; Swiss sprätten, to spread hay, Pl. D. sprei'n (for spreiden), to spread out hay, flax, &c. to dry (Danneil) ; G. sprudeln, to sputter, to spurt ; OHG. anspradern, to sprinkle ; E. spirtle, E. dial. sprittle (Mrs Baker), spraid (Forby), to spatter, to sprinkle.

Thus there can be no doubt that spread comes from the image of spattering liquids ; whether it is connected with G. breiten, to spread abroad, is a different question. It may be that breit itself takes its rise in a representation of the sound of spattering or scattering particles abroad.

Spree. See Spry.

Sprig. The representation of a crackling noise gives rise to two parallel roots, sprat and sprak, from the first of which has been deduced spray, a twig. From the latter form spring Sw. spraka, to crack, crackle ; spricka, to crack, burst, split ; spricka ut, to burst forth, to spring, bud, shoot ; spräcka, to shatter, break to pieces, leading to Swiss spryggen, spryggelen, to splinter ; spryggeli, a match or small splinter ; gespriggelt, speckled ; Lith. sprageti, spragseti, to crackle, sprogti, to crack, burst, split, and thence to shoot, sprout, bud ; sproga, a crack, a sprig or shoot of a tree ; sprogalas, a sprout or shoot, W. brigyn, ysbrigyn, a sprig, twig, shoot of tree.

Sprightly. See Sprite.

Spring. A sharp sudden movement is typified by a sound of similar character, such as a crack or snap. Now the use of a root sprag or sprack, representing the sound of a crack, is exemplified in Sw. spraka, Da. sprage, Lith. sprageti, to crackle ; sprogti, Sw. spricka, to crack, burst, split ; spräcka, to cause to burst, to shatter. Of these last Sw. springa, to split, burst, spring forth, and språnga, to cause to burst, G. sprengen, to scatter, to burst open, to cause to spring, are nasalised forms. Glaset sprang, the glass cracked; springa lek (to crack to the extent of becoming leaky), to spring a leak. Springa i stycken, to fly to pieces. To spring a mast is when a mast is only cracked but not broken.—B.
\* Springald. 1. A youth. 'Joseph, when he was sold to Potiphar, he was a fair young springald.'—Latimer. In this application it is probable that the word has originally signified a branch or shoot of a tree, like Gael, gas, gasan, or gallan, or our own imp, all of which signify both a branch and a youth. Thus Cot. translates mon peton, my pretty springall, my gentle imp. The origin is the OFr. espringaler, to spring, bound, spurt (Cot.), and though espringale is not found in the sense in question, yet Roquefort has esprinier, a scion, shoot, imp for grafting.
2. Fr. espringalle, espringarde, espingarde, Prov. espringalo, espingalo, was an ancient machine of war for casting large darts or stones, and the name was subsequently applied to a piece of artillery. Sp. espingarda, a musketoon. The double form of the word with and without an r after the p is found in the original verb as well as in the derivative. We have Lang. espinga as well as Fr. espringuer, espringaler, to leap, spring, dance; It. springare, springere, to wince or thrust forward violently, to fling; sprinto, springato, yerked, winced (Fl.); and also, spingare, to jog one's feet (Altieri), spingere, spignere, to drive, to thrust on forwards.
Springe. A noose to catch birds with, a spring-noose. Du. spring-net, a net to catch birds with.
To Sprinkle. The representation of a crackling or explosive sound by the syllable sprak (as shown under Spark) gives rise to Lat. spargere (for spragere), to scatter in fragments, as well as the nasalised E. dial. sprunk, to crack or split; G. sprengen, OE. sprenge, to spread, scatter, sprinkle; Du. sprenkelen, to sprinkle; sprenkel, a spot, a spark; G. sprenkeln, to mark with scattered spots, to speckle. In the latter sense we have (without the nasal) Sw. spräckla, E. dial. spreckle, Swiss gespriggelt, speckled, freckled.
Sprit. Examples have been given under Spark, Spring, Sprinkle, of words derived from a root, sprak, representing a crack or explosion, and signifying cracking, splitting, bursting asunder, scattering in fragments, spreading abroad, and a similar series may be traced to the parallel root sprat. G. prasseln, spratzen, spratzeln, to crackle; Swiss sprätten, to spread hay; Sw. sprätta, to sputter like a pen, to scatter abroad, to spread; spritta, to crackle like salt in the fire, to spirt, spring forth as water; N. spretta, to split, to spring asunder, to fly abroad like chips of wood or stone under the axe; to spring or shoot like leaves, to spring up like the sun at day dawn, and actively, to scatter abroad, to sprinkle. Dæ spratt fliserne paa alle kantar, the splinters flew on all sides. E. sprit, to split, sprout, grow; to sprittle, to sprinkle (Mrs Baker); sprotes, fragments. 'And thei breken here speres so rudely that the tronchouns flew in sprotes and peces alle aboute the halle.'—Maundeville. OHG. sprat, a crum or atom. Du. sprot, a spot or freckle; sprietelen, to sprinkle; spriet, the cleft or fork of the body; sprietwegh, the parting of two ways; spriet (properly a piece of cleft wood), a javelin, spear, shepherd's staff, the yard of a sail, bowsprit. AS. eafor spreot, a boar spear; sprota, a nail or peg.
Sprite.—Spright. Contracted from spirit, analogous to Fr. esprit, Sw. sprit. Winsprit, spirits of wine. Sprightly, spirited, lively.
Sprout.—Spurt.—Spirt. The distinction between spurt as applied to the spouting or projection of liquids, and sprout, to the springing of vegetable life, appears to be a late refinement, the two forms being used by Cotgrave indifferently in either sense. 'Rejaillir, to spurt or sprout (as water) back again.' 'Drageon fourcherain, a shoot that spurteth out between two branches.' In like manner Bav. sprutzen, to spirt or sprinkle, also to sprout or spring as a plant. Du. spruiten, to sprout, is identical with Sw. spruta, to spirt, sprinkle, squirt.
Spurt, sprout, and sputter, are different arrangements of the same consonantal sounds representing the noise made by a mixture of air and drops of water. N. sputra, spruta, spryta. Da. sprutte, sprude, G. sprudeln, to spurt, spout, gush, to bubble up; It. spruzzare, to sprinkle; E. dial. spruttled, sprinkled over; Sc. sprutillit, spourtillit, speckled, spotted; Pl.D. sprutteln, Du. sproetel, sproet, spots, freckles.
A short exertion is familiarly called a spirt or spurt, while in Sussex the name of sprut is given to a violent jerk or sudden movement.
Spruce. 1. Neat or fine in garb.—B.

The original sense, as in the case of the nearly synonymous smart, is brisk, lively in action, then carefully attended to, as opposed to dull and slovenly. To spruce up, to trim, to dress. Sprack, sprag, quick, lively, active ; spark, a gay dashing fellow.—Hal. ON. sparkr, brisk, lively. E. spurk, brisk, smart.

Come spurk up, here's your sweetheart a-coming. Moor.

To spurk up, to spring, shoot, or brisk up.—Ray. To sprug up, to dress neatly.—Hal. To perk up again, to recover from sickness ; to perk oneself up, to adorn. The idea of attention to dress is constantly connected with that of briskness and life.

The equivalent of E. spurk, sprug, is Sw. spricka, to crack, snap, spring, shoot, and in the same way it seems that spruce is to be compared with Bav. spriessen, to spring, to sprout ; sprutzen, to sprout, to spirt ; sprutzen, a well-grown young girl ; Swiss sprutzen, to spring with elastic force.

In like manner sprunt, to spring, and sprunt, lively, active, brisk, spruce.

See, this sweet simpering babe, Sweet image of thyself ; see, how it sprunts With joy at thy approach. B. Jonson, Devil is an Ass.

How do I look to-day, am I not dressed Spruntly ?—Ibid.

Spruce-beer.—Spruce-fir. A decoction of the young shoots of spruce and silver fir was much in use on the shores of the Baltic as a remedy in scorbutic, gouty, and rheumatic complaints. The sprouts from which it was made were called sprossen in G. and jopen in Du., and the decoction itself sprossen- or jopenbier. From the first of these is E. spruce-beer.—Beke in N. and Q., Aug. 3, 1860. And doubtless the spruce-fir, G. sprossenfichte—Ad., takes its name as the fir of which the sprouts are chiefly used for the foregoing purpose, and not from being brought from Prussia, as commonly supposed.

Spry. Nimble, active, alert. A softened pronunciation of the synonymous sprag, sprack. Spree, a frolic, is probably from the same root, signifying a spurt, an ebullition of spirits. G. sprühen, to spurt.

Spud.—Spuddle, w. of E. spudlee, to stir the embers with a poker ; spuddle, to move about, to do any trifling matter with an air of business.—Hal. To puddle iron is to stir a melted mass in the oven with an iron rod till it coheres in a viscous lump. Spud, a pointed staff.

Sw. spåde, spå, a staff, a rod ; N. spode, spuda, a stick for turning cakes in the oven, a small shovel. W. yspodol, a slice to spread salve, a staff ; yspodoli, to cudgel.

Spunk. Spirit. W. ysponcio, to smack, to bound sharply ; ysponc, a jerk, squirt, skip or quick bound. Spunk is also a spark, and thence apparently a match, tinder, touchwood. Sc. to spank is to move with quickness and elasticity, and also to sparkle or shine.—Jam. Compare also Sc. to spang, to spring, with spangle, to sparkle. See Spank, Spangle. Du. voncke, a spark, also tinder.

Spur.—To Spurn. AS. spura, spora, G. sporn, ON. spori, Sw. sporre, Gael. spor, W. yspardun, Fr. éperon. It. sperone, sprone, a spur ; AS. spurnan, spurnettan, to kick, to spurn ; sporning, a stumbling-block. Lith. spirti, sperdyti, spardyti, to kick, stamp, thrust with the foot. Fr. esparer, to kick. Lat. spernere, to despise, probably signified, first, like E. spurn, to kick, then to kick away, to despise. ON. spor, Da. fodspor, footmark, the indenture made by the pressure of the foot. See To Spar.

Spurge. A plant, the juice of which is so hot and corroding that it is called Devil's Milk, which being dropped upon warts eats them away.—B. Hence the name, Fr. espurge, from espurger, to purge, cleanse, rid of.—Cot.

Spurious. Lat. spurius, bastard.

To Spurn. See Spur.

To Spurt. See Sprout.

To Sputter. Pl.D. sputtern, N. sputra, to sputter, spurt. Formed to represent the sound of a mixture of air and liquid driven from an orifice.

* Spy. Fr. espier. It. spiare, OHG. spiohon, spiehan, spehon, G. spähen, Du. spieden, spien. Da. speide, to examine narrowly, to explore. Notwithstanding the terminal d of the Du. and Da. forms, the true relation seems to be with Lat. specio, specto, to look, whence specular, to look out, explore ; speculator, a scout or spy. OberD. spegen, spechen, Pol. szpiegować, Let. spiggot, to spy. The radical signification is probably shown in Let. spigulôt, to glitter ; spiguls, a glowworm ; spidêt, to shine ; spidigs, shining, brilliant. The G. blicken, radically signifying to shine, expresses also the idea of looking.

Squab. Anything thick and soft ; a soft stuffed cushion, a thick fat man or woman, an unfledged bird or nestling. From a representation of the sound made by the fall of a soft lump.

No, truly, Sir, I should be loth to see you Come fluttering down like a young rook, cry, and take ye up with your brains beaten into your buttocks.—B. & F.

The eagle took the tortoise up into the air, and dropped him down, squab, upon a rock, that dashed him to pieces.—L'Estrange in T.

In the same way plump, thick and fat, from the sound made by the fall of a body of such a nature.

Squabble. Words signifying noisy talk are commonly taken from the dashing of water. Thus we have G. waschen, ON. thwætta, to wash, also to tattle; It. guazzare, to dabble, plash; guazzolare, to prattle; Da. dial. squatte, to slop, also to chatter, tattle. In like manner, Du. kabbelen, to beat as waves against the shore; en kabbelend beekje, a murmuring brook; Sw. käbbla, to squabble, wrangle; N. svabba, E. dial. squad, swab, swob, to splash; swobble, to talk in a noisy bullying manner—Forby; Swiss schwabbeln, to splash; G. schwabbeln, geschwabbel, chatter.

Squad. A group, a company.—Hal. Fr. escouade, a small body of men. The latter is explained as if for escouadre, from Sp. escuadra, Fr. escadre, It. squadra, a troop or square of soldiers, which is also supposed to be the origin of G. geschwader, OberD. geschwieter, Du. geswade, geswadder (Kil.), a squadron. But these latterforms may be satisfactorily explained from an internal source, and if the Fr. escadre or It. squadra had been adopted in G. they never would have received the Teutonic prefix ge. The origin of G. geschwader is shown in Du. swadderen, to splash, slop, spill, to make a noise, and thence gheswadder, a noise, disturbance, crowd, a troop of men. Sc. swatter, to dabble, also a large collection, especially of small things: 'a swatter of bairns.' In a similar manner we have charm, a hum, or low murmuring noise; a charm of goldfinches, a flock.

The E. squad, and perhaps Fr. escouade, may be derived from the same source by a different track. The sense of breaking up a complex body into separate divisions may naturally be expressed by the figure of splashing or spilling liquid. Thus from E. squatter, swatter, to dabble, splash, we pass to Sw. squättra, to waste or scatter, and the nasalised E. squander, provincially used in the sense of disperse, scatter. N. squetta, to spirt, splash, to spread abroad like a flock of cattle; squett, a small portion of liquid. The latter form is the equivalent of Lincolnsh. squad, sloppy dirt, which seems to signify a lump or dab, an unmoulded mass, when an awkward boy is called an awkward squad. In the same way, a swad, a clown or bumpkin—Hal.; a swad of a woman, obesula.—Coles. The dim. squidlet signifies a small piece of anything, as of meat or cloth.—Hal. The derivation of Fr. escouade from E. squad is supported by Rouchi escouater, to squat or press flat. Wad is used in a similar manner for a body of people when it is said of persons connected together in any way of business that they are all in the same wad.—Hal.

Squalid. Lat. squaleo, to be filthy.

Squall. A sudden storm of wind and rain. Sw. squala expresses the sound of gushing water. Regnet squalade på gatorna, the streets were streaming with rain. Blodet squalade ur såret, the blood gushed out of the wound. Squalregn, a violent shower of rain; squalbäck, a torrent; squalor, skulor, dish-wash. See Scullery.

To Squall.—Squeal, ON. squala, to scream, cry, make a noise; squäldr, Da. squalder, noisy talk, clamour; N. skvaldra, to yelp as dogs, to bawl, make a noise; Sw. squällra, to tattle; squäla, to squall as an infant. E. squeal, to make a shrill cry. It. squillare, to sound shrill and clear, to ring. Prov. quilar, quillar, to chirp, chatter, cry, complain. 'La regina va gitar un gran quil,' the queen makes a great cry. Fin. kilis, ringing, clear sounding; kilistä, to ring; kiljua, to cry with a shrill voice, to vociferate.

To Squander. A nasalised form of squatter, signifying, in the first place, to splash or spill liquids, then to disperse, scatter, waste. Da. squatte, to splash, spirt, and fig. to dissipate; Sw. squättra, to squander. E. to squat, to splash; to swatter, to spill or throw about water, also to scatter, to dissipate.—Hal. Squandered is still used in the sense of dispersed. His family are all grown up and squandered about the country.—Hal.

Square. OFr. esquarré. It. squadro, Lat. quadratus.

To Squash. E. dial. squash, to dabble, splash—Moor; squish-squash, noise made by the feet in walking over a swampy piece of ground. If nought was seen, he heard a squish-squash sound, As when one's shoes the drenching waters fill. Clare. Pl. D. quatsken, quasken, quassen, express the sound of dabbling in a wet material, walking with water in the shoes, or dashing a soft material on the ground. G. quatschen, to make the sound of wet things. In dreck treten dass es quatschet, to plash in the mire. Quetschen, to quash, squash, crush, bruise. Den saft aus den trauben quetschen, to squeeze the juice out of grapes. Nüsse quetschen, to crack nuts. It. guazzare, to dabble, splash; squazzo d'acqua, a plash of water; squacciare, squasciare, Fr. esquacher, to squash, crush something soft.

To Squat. To bruise or make flat by letting fall, to sit or cower down—B.; to throw anything against the ground—Baret; to splash, to make flat, to squat.—Hal.
Saiyng that though laws were squatted in warre, yet they ought to be revived in peace.—Hollinshed.
As radical syllable of the imitative squat-ter, squat represents the sound of a drop of liquid falling to the ground, and is then figuratively used to signify lying flat and close to the ground like a liquid mass. Da. dial. squatte, to slop, spill; squat, a slop, blot, drop; Derbysh. squot, to spot with dirt. It. guattare, quattire, to squat or cower down, to lie close and hushed.—Fl.
The same transition from the idea of spilling liquid to that of lying close to the ground is seen in Da. dial. blat. Blatte, a drop, a blot, koblat, a cow-plat or flat cake of cow-dung, compared with Fr. blotir, to squat, skowk or lie close to the ground, to hide or keep close.—Cot.

To Squatter.—Squitter. To squatter is a word not generally recognised in our dictionaries, though fully understood by every one. It is a parallel form with spatter, representing the sound of dashing about a liquid in scattered drops, and is used by Cotgrave in explaining Fr. escarter, to scatter, to shed, squatter, to throw about or abroad. The parallel forms spatter and squatter are also found in Piedm. spattare, to spill, scatter, spread, and It. scattarare, to scatter.—Fl. Sc. squatter, swatter, to go splashing along; E. dial. swatter, to spill or throw about water as geese and ducks do in drinking. Bav. schwadern, schwidern, to splash, to spill. Sw. squattra preserves the secondary sense of chatter, tattle, constantly expressed by reference to the sound of dashing water. It. squaccherato, squattered, plashy.—Fl.
The thinner vowel in squitter indicates an action of more confined nature than squatter. N. skvittra, Grisons squittrar, squittar, to squirt, spirt; squittir (of cattle), to be loose in the bowels.

To Squeak.—Squeal. The momentary sound of the terminal k in squeak, as compared with the continuous sound of l in squeal, adapts the former word to represent a short acute cry, the latter a prolonged note of similar character. G. quicken, quicksen, to squeak like a pig, &c. Prov. quilar, to cry, chirp, &c.

Squeamish. Sickish at stomach, and met. nice, scrupulous.
Thou wast not skoymous of the maiden's womb. Te Deum of 14th cent. in N. & Q., Feb. 20, 1869.
Cleveland swaimous, swaimish, diffident, bashful, shy; Devon weamish, squeamish.—Hal.
It was shown under Qualm that the image of choking is used to express every degree of oppression, from simple sickness of the stomach to death itself. Da. quæle, to choke, to oppress, plague, torment; Sw. quälja, to make sick. Måten quäljer mig: the meat lies heavy on my stomach, makes me qualmish. The derivative qualm signifies what causes choking. Sw. qualm, oppressive, suffocating weather; qualm or qual i magen, sickness at stomach; qualmig, qualmish, sickish; Da. qualm, a choking feeling, thick oppressive air, also as G. qualm, and Du. walm, steam, vapour, smoke. Da. dial. swalm, oppressively hot, smoke, choking vapour. E. dial. swalm, swame, pestilence, sickness.
That yere litulle shal be of wyne, And swame among fatte swyne.—MS. in Hal.
OE. sweam or swaim, subita aegrotacio.—Gouldm. in Pr. Pm. Sweem, tristicia, molestia, maeror; swemyn, molestor, maereo.—Pr. Pm. To think swem in Genesis and Exodus is to grieve over. Skeymows, sweymows, queymows, abhominativus.—Pr. Pm. Devon weamish may be compared with Sw. wämjas, to nauseate, have disgust at. Walmynge of the stomake, nausia.—Pr. Pm.

To Squeeze. AS. cwysan, to squeeze, crush, bruise. Pl.D. quetsen, quädsen, G. quetschen, quedden, quetten, to squeeze.

Squelch.—Squolsh. The sound produced by the fall of soft bodies.—Wright. Hence squelch, a fall.

Squib. A child's squirt—Mrs Baker; also a firework, spouting fire like a squirt does water. A modification of E. dial. squab (Mrs Baker), swab, N. svabba, to splash. From the notion of splashing or dashing about liquids we pass to that of driving it out in a thin stream, as in spatter, sputter, spurt or spirt; squatter, squitter, squirt.
To Squint. Fr. guigner, to wink or aim with one eye, to blink, to wink and look askew.— Cot. To squinny, to look with eyes half shut, to squint. To squine, to squint.— Mrs Baker. To squink, to wink or squint.— Moor. See Wink.
To Squir. To cast away with a jerk [to hurl], to whirl round.— Hal. To skir, to graze or touch lightly, to scour a country; to scur, to move hastily.— Wright. From a representation of the whirring noise of a body hurled through the air, with a prefixed s-. Sw. hurra, to whirl. Pl.D. swiren, to fly about, to riot, to swing from side to side. G. scharren, to scrape; schurren, to slip over the surface with a scraping sound; schurrende fusstritte; Hinweg schurren, to scurry off. It. sguirrare is quoted by Adelung as equivalent to G. schwirren, to chirp, warble, whirr. ON. svarra, to whizz, roar, rush; N. svirla, E. dial. swir, to whirl; to swirk, to fly with velocity, to swirl, to whirl.— Jam.
Squire. See Esquire.
To Squirm. To wriggle like an eel. The sound of a whizzing movement, as shown under Squir, is represented by the syllables whirr, swirr, squir. The roots so formed are modified by terminal elements adapted by their nature to represent a continuous or a momentary movement. Thus swirk signifies a jerk or rapid sudden movement; swirl, a continuous movement, analogous to the relation between squeak and squeal. The final m, though not so common as l, has a similar effect in the construction of words, giving to squirm the signification of a whirling, twisting movement. G. schwärmen imitates the confused noise which things make in their motion, the humming or buzzing of bees, of a crowd of people. See Swarm.
Squirrel. Fr. écureuil, Aragonese esquirol, escurol, from a dim. of Lat. sciu-rus, Gr. σκίουρος, a squirrel, properly signifying bushy-tail; from σκιά, shade, and οὐρά, tail.
Squirt. As we have spatter, sputter, spurt, N. sputra, spruta, by different arrangements of the consonantal sounds, so we are led from squatter, squitter, to squirt; from swatter to Pl.D. swirtjen, E. dial. swirt, to squirt. Esthon. wirtsuma, to sprinkle, spirt, splash. N. squetta, squittra, to spirt, spout, squirt, splash.

To Stab. To give a sharp abrupt thrust. Gael. stob, stab, thrust, drive into the ground, and as a noun, a projecting stump, a pole, stake, prickle; ON. stappa, stoppa, to pound, to stamp; N. stappa also, as Lat. stipare, to stuff, to cram; Pl.D. stappen, to step, to go slowly; N. stabba, stabla, to go slowly, to stagger; Gr. στέμβω, to stamp, to tread. It has been shown, under Falter, Halt, Hamper, that the senses of stammering or stuttering, and staggering, limping, stumbling, are often expressed by the same or slightly modified forms, signifying a series of abrupt efforts made in the one case with the voice in the attempt to speak, in the other with the legs and body in the attempt to walk. To stammer is used in the N. of E. and Scotland in the sense of stumble or stagger. Fr. chanceler, to stagger, also to stammer.— Cot. Sw. stappla, to stammer, stutter, also to stumble. In this latter example the frequentative l signifies repetition or continuation of action, while the radical syllable stap corresponds to a single element of which the action is composed, viz. an abrupt effort with the voice or with the limbs, a thrust, stamp, or stab. The same train of thought may be traced through two similar series in which the final labial of stab, stamp, stammer, is exchanged for a corresponding guttural and dental. Thus in the guttural series, Swiss stag-geln, Rhenish staggsen, to stammer; Sc. stacker, stacher, stocker, to stagger; ON. stakra, to totter. Then passing to the elementary form, Sc. stug, to stab; stuggy, said of stubble when cut unevenly; to stock, to thrust; stok, stog-sword, Fr. estoc, a thrusting sword. For so Eneas stokkis his stiff brand, Throw out the youngkere hard up till his hand. D. V. 349, 14. G. stock, a stick, staff, stock of a tree; Bret. steki (for stokt), to knock, jolt; stok, a shock or knock. With a dental termination, G. stottern, and provincially stattern, statzen, stotzen, statzeln, to stutter; Sc. stoit, stot, stoiter, to walk in a staggering way, to stumble. Sho stottis at straes, syne stumbilles not at stanis.— Montgomery in Jam. Du. stooten, to push, thrust, thump, hit; stootsteen, a stumbling-block.
Stable. 1. Lat. stabulum, from stare, to stand.
Stable. 2. Stablish. Lat. stabilis, firm on its basis, from stare, to stand; OFr. establer, Fr. établir, to make stable.

Stack. From forms like Sc. stacker, to stagger, ON. stakra, to totter, the syllable stak comes to express the sense of jog or project sharply. ON. stakka, a stump ; staksteinar, projecting stones ; stakkr, a stack or projecting heap. Gael. stac, a precipice ; a steep and high cliff; stacach, rugged, uneven. A stack is a precipitous rock standing separate from a line of cliffs. See Stagger.
Staddle. A young tree left standing when underwood is felled ; a support. AS. stæthel, stæthol, a foundation, that on which a structure stands. ON. staða, standing ; Da. stade, stand, station. See Stead.
Staff. ON. stafr, G. stab, Alban. stapi, a staff. The meaning of the word is an implement of stabbing or thrusting, as shown in Gael. stob, push, stab, thrust ; stob, a stake, pointed iron or stick, prickle, stump ; Lat. stipo, to cram, stuff, pack ; stipes, a stake, stock. In like manner G. stock, a stick, may be compared with Sc. stug, to stab ; stock, to thrust. The E. stick is used as a noun in the sense of staff, and as a verb in that of stab or thrust into.
Stag. The name of stag is given to very different animals, chiefly however to the male. ON. steggr, steggi, a gander or drake. Sc. stag, staig, a stallion or young horse. E. stag, a castrated bull, a gander, a turkey-cock fatted in its second year.—Hal. Staggard, a hart in its fourth year.—B. Swiss stagel, a hart.
Stage. Fr. estage, a story, stage, loft, or height of a house ; also a lodging, dwelling-house, or place of abiding. Estager, a vassal, dweller within such or such a liberty or manor.—Cot. Prov. estatge, residence, delay, rank, manner, state. 'Tornara en aquel estatge on el era premeiramen:' ' will return to that state of life where he was first. 'Pueys s'en torna la mars suau en son estatge:' ' then the sea returns quickly to its bed.—Rayn. A stage is a framework of timber on which anything is made to stand. 'The great toure stode but on stages of tymbre.'—Berners, Froissart. From Lat. stare ; Prov. estar, to remain, to be. The sense of stage on a journey may be either a metaphor from the floors successively attained in going to the top of a house, or it may be used in the original sense of resting-place.
To Stagger. Sc. stacker, stocker, OE. staker (Chaucer), Da. dial. staggre, staggle, stagge, to stagger; ON. stakra, to totter ; staka, to stumble ; Du. staggelen, to paw the ground. Swiss staggeln, Rhenish staggsen, N.Fris. staggin (Johannsen, p. 52), to stammer, stutter. Fr. saggoter, to jolt, rudely to shog or shake.—Cot. A staggering gait is when one moves by a series of abrupt movements, swaying from side to side, while in stammering or stuttering the broken efforts are made with the voice instead of the legs. The syllables dag, jag, jog, shag, shog, stag, are all used to represent movement abruptly checked. See Stab.
Stagnate.—Stagnant. Lat. stagnum, a standing pool. See Stanch.
Staid. Grave, sober, stayed or supported, not vacillating. See Stay.
To Stain.—Distain. Fr. desteindre, to distaine, to dead or take away the colour of ; desteinct, distained, pale, wan, bleak, whose die is decayed or colour lost.—Cot. I stayne a thyng, I marre the colour : je destains.—Palsgr. Lat. tingere, to dye.
Stairs. AS. stæger, a ladder, steps ; Du. steiger, waterside stairs, a mason's scaffold ; Sw. steg, a step ; stege, a ladder ; NE. stee, steye, a ladder. From Goth. steigan, AS. stigan, OE. steye, to mount, to step up. 'There ne is cable in no land maked that might stretche to me to drawe me into blisse, ne steyers to steye on is none.'—Chaucer, Test. Love. N. stiga fram, to step forwards ; s. upp, to lift the foot ; s. ned, to set down the foot, to tread ; s. uppyve, to tread over shoe-tops in mud or water ; stig, a step, foot-print, step of a ladder or stairs. Gr. στείχειν, to step, to mount ; Lett. staigât, to go, to walk ; stigt (tief eintreten), to stump. The ultimate origin is the figure of an impulse abruptly stopped, which is represented by the parallel roots stag and stab, as shown under Stab. From the former we have Gael. stac, a hobbling step, and E. stagger, and from the latter ON. stappa, to stamp, Du. stappen, stippen, to step. In stamping or stepping the movement of the foot is abruptly stopped by the solid ground.
Staith. A stage or platform for shipping coals. ON. stöð, Da. stade, a stand, station, standing-place ; stöð also is specially used in the sense of Du. staede, statio navium.—Kil. N. stöð, a quay, landing stage, sea-wall. G. gestade, shore. See Stage.
Stake. Essentially the same word with stack, a syllable representing, in the first instance, effort abruptly checked, then the idea of sticking up or sticking in, what is prominent or projecting, what fastens or is firm. Gael. stac, stumble (make a false step—Armstr.), a hobbling step, halt, a stake or post driven into the ground, a pillar, column, eminence, rock, stack, thorn; stacanach, knolly, rugged, full of impediments. E. stacker, staker, to stagger; ON. staka, to stumble. OFr. estac, estache, a stake, tie; Sp. estaca, G. staken, Du. staeck, a stake, stick, post. Lap. staikes, stable, steady, firm.

Stalactite.—Stalagmite. Gr. σταλακτίς, σταλαγμός, from σταλάσσω or σταλάζω, to fall or distil in drops.

Stale. I. Stale was formerly used in slightly varying senses, derived from Du. stelte, position, place; G. stellen, to place, post, set in a certain place. Die garne, eine falle stellen, to pitch nets, to set a trap. Hence stale, a bait laid to entrap, a decoy, a snare. Stale for foules takyng.—Palsgr.

Still as he went he crafty stales did lay With cunning trains to entrap him unawares. F. Q.

G. stell-vogel, a decoy bird. Das gestell der fischer, nets, &c., laid by fishermen.

Closely allied is the sense of an ambush, a laying in wait. Laie in stale, lay in wait.—Stanihurst. Descr. Ireland. Stale of horsemen in a felde, guetteurs.—Palsgr. OFr. prendre estal, to take position, to stand. G. Eine schrift stellen, to draw up a writing. Sich stellen, to make as though, to behave purposely, to counterfeit.

This easy fool must be my stale, set up To catch the people's eyes.—Dryden.

Was this your drift, to use Femenes name: Was he your fittest stale?—B. J.

2. Another application is, when stale is used in the sense of old, past its season, overkept. Du. stel, vetus, vetustus, reses, quietus.—Kil. This sense may be explained from OFr. tenir estal, to keep your place, to remain.—Roquef. Piedm. stall, of a horse, kept long in the stable; of bread, stale. On a similar plan It. stantio, stantivo, what has long been standing, tainted, stale.

Stale.—Steal. A handle, as of a besom, axe, plough. Pl.D. steel, G. stiel, stalk, pillar, prop, handle. Probably a contraction from a form like Swiss stigel, stiegel, a staff, pole, stiegele, stagel, a prop, support. Hence Swiss stielen, to accompany a godfather to church for the sake of showing him honour, to support him. Lett. stiga, a stalk; stigt, to stick the foot deep in the ground. G. stange, a staff, pole; stängel, a stalk.

To Stale. It. staltare, OFr. estaler, Du. statten, a decorous expression for the urining of horses. Probably not as commonly taking place when the animal returns to the stall or stables, but, as Schmeller explains it, from stopping the horse to let him stale. Das pferd stallt, the horse stops. Stallen den lauf des krieges: to stop the course of the war. Sw. ställa en hest, to stop a horse. Piedm. stali, to stop, to stanch.

Their [mares] staling is no hindrance to their pace in running their carriere, as it doth the horse, who must needs then stand still.—Holland, Pliny.

To Stalk. AS. stalcan, to step; Da. stalke, to go with high uplifted feet, with long steps. N. stauka, to go slowly, to stump along like an old man with a stick. 'A stalker or goer upon stilts or crutches, grallator.'—Withal. 1608. The proper meaning is, to set down the foot with marked effort, so as to throw the weight of the body on that leg. Gael. stalc, dash your foot against—M'Alpine; walk with halting gait—Macleod; stailc, strike, knock against, stamp, set down the foot suddenly; Ir. stailc, stop or impediment; E. dial. stalk, to poach the ground, the horse's feet to sink deep into it.

It stalks so as horses can't come on the land; us were forced to dibble it.—Mrs Baker.

Stalky, miry.—Hal.

The origin may be a representation of movement abruptly checked by a form like Bret. stlak, clap, crack. In a similar manner, the parallel root stlap (shown in Bret. stlapa, to dash, to throw with violence) might give rise to Du. stalpen, to paw the ground (ungulâ ferire), stelpen, stulpen, to stop (properly to strike against)—Kil.; Sc. stilp, to halt, to go on crutches.

So also from Bret. strak, crack, loud noise, we pass to G. straucheln, Du. struikeln, to stumble; Bav. storkeln, starkeln, to strut, stagger; Dorset, stark, to walk slowly; N.Fris. staurke, to strut.

Stalk. ON. stilkr, N. stalk, stelk, stylk, stalk; Da. stilk, stalk, stem, handle; Suffolk stawk, the handle of a whip.

The equivalence of G. stielchen, from stiele, a stalk, handle, column, would lead us to regard the final k of stalk as a diminutival ending, were it not for the occurrence of parallel forms stilp and stilt, in which the k of stalk is exchanged for a p and t respectively. Sc. stilp, to stump, to go on stilts or crutches; Walach. stilpu, a column; stilpare, a shoot, twig;

Sw. stolpe, a stake, support, leg, pillar; E. dial. stulp, stump, post; Swiss stelz, a stalk—Adelung; E. stilt, a support. The radical signification seems to be that explained under To Stalk, viz. striking with the foot, throwing the weight of the body upon one leg as in staggering or stumbling or stepping with deliberation, whence the name is transferred to anything used as a leg in bearing up a weight, a prop, support, stalk.

Stall. ON. stallr, that on which anything stands or is placed, bench, foot, basis; AS. steal, a stall, place, stead, seat, room. Horsa steal, a place for horses or stable. Gehalgode on his stealle, consecrated in his stead. OHG. stall, G. stelle, place; stal geban, to give place; kernstal, the place which holds kernels, the core of fruit. Bav. kerzenstall, a candlestick; burgstall, place where a castle stands or has stood. It. stallo, OFr. estal, place, seat, residence, whence estaller, to install, to place in seat. Prendre estal, to take position.

De haut estal en bas escame Puëent bien lor siège cangier : —from high stall to lowly bench can well change their seat.—Roquef.

In this sense we speak of the stalls of a cathedral. In a somewhat different application, Fr. estail, estal, the stall of a shop or booth, anything whereon wares are laid and showed to be sold.—Cot. Lith. stalas, Pol. stól, a table. Bav. stellen, what is set for objects to stand on; bücherstellen, G. büchergestell, a book-stand or book-stall.

Stallion. Fr. estalon, étalon. It. Stallone, stallione, a horse long kept in the stable without being used, also a stallion.—Fl. A stallion is called equus ad stallum in Leg. Wisig. according to Diez.

Stamina. Lat. stamen, a thread, the grain of wood.

To Stammer. Goth. stamms, OHG. stamm, ON. stamr, AS. stomm, stamer, stommer, stammering; ON. stama, Sw. stamma, OHG. stamen, stammen, stammalôn, stambilôn, G. stammeln, stammern, stummeln, AS. stommettan, to stammer, stutter. Sc. stammer, to stagger. 'The horse stammers.' The broken efforts made by the voice in stammering, as contrasted with the uniform flow of ordinary speech, are represented by varying forms, of which perhaps Sw. stappla, to stammer or stagger, may be taken as the original type. The final p of the root is first nasalised and afterwards absorbed, leaving the nasal as its sole representative,

STANCH as shown in the forms OHG. stambilon, OE. stamber (Hal.), E. stumble, stammer. A similar series is exhibited in Sw. happla, Sc. habble, habber, to stammer; E. hobble, to limp; Sc. hamp, to stammer, to halt in walking; Du. hompelen, to limp, E. hambyr (Pr. Pm.), hammer, to stammer, to give repeated blows, to do a thing by repeated efforts.

To Stamp. See Step.

To Stanch.—Stanch. Fr. estancher, to stanch or stop the flow of liquid, to quench. Sp. estancar, to stop, to prohibit, to stop a leak; estanco, stanch, water-tight. A stanch vessel is one that will hold the water in or out, whence fig. stanch, firm, reliable. Bret. stanka, to stop the flow of liquid, to stop a hole, to obstruct; Prov. estancar, restancar, to stanch, to stop; estanc, firm, stable. Lat. extinguere, restinguere, to quench, put out a fire, in which sense E. stanch also was formerly used.

The foresayde erle sette fyre upon a syde of the citie—whiche fyre was scantly stenckyd in seven dayes after.—Fabyan, Chron.

Prov. estancir, to quench. In Lat. stagnum, a standing water. It. stagnare, to stanch, to stagnate, the g and n are transposed, which are again found in proper order in OFr. estanche, estang, Gael. stang, a pond.

The sense of stoppage or hindrance of action is expressed by forms springing from two parallel roots, stab, stap, stamp, and stag, stak, stank, signifying, in the first instance, jog, thrust, impulse abruptly checked by an obstacle, which may either oppose an absolute resistance to motion, or may be penetrated to some extent, allowing the implement of force to stick fast in the substance of the impediment. To the former class belong E. stab, to strike with a sudden thrust; stamp, to strike the ground with the foot; Sw. stappa, to pound, to stuff or thrust into; Sc. stap, to stop; Prov. estampir, to stop, to close: to the latter, Du. staggelen, to strike the ground with the foot, to paw like a horse, E. stagger, staker, to make abrupt movements right and left instead of moving steadily onwards; Swiss staggelen, stanggeln, to stutter, to speak by a series of broken efforts; Bret. stok, a shock or knock; ON. staka, to stumble, to strike against an impediment; Sc. stock, to thrust; G. stocken, to stop, to cease from motion, to stick or stop short in speech; Lang. s'estacâ, to stick at, hesitate, boggle; estangâ, to stop, shut, fasten; Devon stagged, stuck in the mire ; Bret. staga, Castrais estaca, to fasten ; G. stang, It. stanga, a stake, bar, or implement for thrusting ; ON. stanga, to stick, thrust, strike with the horns ; Sw. stånga, Lap. stagget, to shut.
Stanchion. Supporters in buildings ; (in ships) pieces of timber that support the wast-trees.—B. Fr. estanson, a prop, stay, trestle ; estancer, to prop, to stay.—Cot. Prov. estanc, firm, stable. W. ystanc, a hold-fast, bracket ; ystancio, to prop. The office of a stanchion is to thrust against an object and prevent it from giving way. See Stanch.
To Stand. Goth. standan, pret. stoð; ON. standa, stoð, staðit. Staða, stand-ing, standing still ; solstaða, solstice ; veðrstaða, the standing or direction of the wind. Staða, as Da. stade, stand, station, stall ; also as Da. sted, stead, place ; Goth. staðs, place.
The root of the word is stad, which, on the one hand, is nasalised in stand, while the d is softened down and lost in G. stehen, Lat. stare, Gr. ἵστη-μι, Sanscr. sthā, Boh. stá-ti. The final t will be ob-served in Lat. status, standing, posture, station. The primary meaning is proba-bly to strike against, to meet with an im-pediment, to come to a stop, from the representation of an abrupt sound by the syllable stad, stat, in a way analogous to the course of development illustrated under Stanch. Gael. stad, impediment, stop, cessation ; stadach, stopping, hesi-tating, stammering ; Devon stat, stopped—Hal. ; E. stotter, stutter, stut, to speak in broken tones ; Sc. stot, stoit, stoiter, to totter, stagger, stumble.
Sho stottis at straes, syne stumbillis not at stanes.
To stot, to stop.—Jam. Goth. stautan, Sw. stöta. Da. støde, Du. stooten, to strike against, to jolt, jog, thrust.
Standard. It. stendardo, Prov. estan-dart, estandard, Sp. estandarte, Fr. éten-dart, Mid.Lat. standardum, stantarum, standarum. Two words from different de-rivations seem to be confounded. The stan-dard was a lofty pole or mast, either borne in a car or fixed in the ground, marking the head-quarters of an army, and commonly bearing a flag on which were displayed the insignia of the authorities to which it belonged. Hence the word is explained from Lat. extendere, It. stendere, to spread abroad, display. Stendale, any displaid streamer, banner, or standard.—Fl. Era uno carro in su quattro rote, et havevavi su due grande antenne vermiglie, in su le quali ventilava il grande stendale dell' arme del commune de Firenze.—Joh. Vil-lani in Duc. Extendarium, vexillum.—Albertinus Mussatus (ob. A.D. 1329) de Gestis Italicorum. On the other hand, the term frequently occurs in the histories of the crusades, designating especially the ensigns of the Saracens, which con-sisted solely of a stander or upright with-out a flag.
Unus autem nostrorum accepit standarum Ammaravisi, desuper quod erat pomum aureum, hasta vero tota cooperta argento : quod stanta-rum apud nos dicitur vexillum.—Tudebodus in Duc. Longissima hasta, argento operta per totum, quod vocant Standart, et quæ regis Babiloniae ex-ercitui signum praeferebatur et circa quam praeci-pua virtus densabatur.—Albertus Aquensis, A.D. 1110. Qui omnes procedentes secus Alvertum in campo quodam—standart, id est, malum navis erexerunt, vexillum S. Petri—in eo suspendentes.—Simeon Dunelm. A.D. 1138.
Aliqui coram in medio cujusdam machinæ, quam illi adduxerant, unius navis malum erexe-runt, quod Standard appellaverant, unde Hugo Eboracensis Archidiaconus : Dicitur a stando standardum, quod stetit illic Militiæ probitas, vincere sive mori. In summitate vero ipsius arboris—vexilla suspen-debant.—Ricardus Hagustald. A.D. 1190.
G. ständer, an upright in building ; thür-ständer, eckständer, a door-post, corner-post. In this sense E. standard is a fruit-tree that stands of itself in opposition to one that is supported against a wall. As the standard is the object to which the army looks for direction, the term is met. applied to any fixed mark to which certain actions or constructions are to be made to conform : the standard of morals, standard of weights and measures.
Stang. ON. stong, ohg. stanga. It. stanga, a bar, staff, pole, properly an in-strument of thrusting, from ON. stanga, to thrust, stick, strike with the horns. Sw. stånga, to shut, to fence ; stangel, a bar, also, as G. Stengel, a stalk, the part of a plant that shoots up and supports the flowering branches. Lap. stagget, to shut ; staggo, a stake or pole.
Stanza. It. stanza, Fr. stance, a staff or stave of verses at the close of which there is a pause in the versification. Sp. estancia, stay, continuance in a place, re-sidence, stanza. From estar, to stand. Walach. stare, a pause, a stanza in verse.
Staple. I. AS. stapel, a prop, support, trestle.
Under ech stapel of his bed, That he niste, four thai hid.—Seven Sages.
Du. stapel, stalk, stem, support, heap, steeple, foot, basis on which anything rests.—Kil. Sw. stapel, stocks on which a ship is built, a heap, pile ; OFr. estappe

Rouchi estape, a stake, pole, pile. Gael. stapul, bolt, bar, staple. Fr. estampeau, a trestle; estamper, to support, to underprop.—Cot.

The origin of the word is the root stab or stap, signifying abrupt thrust, from whence we pass to the notion of a prominence or projection, as in Da. dial. stap, N. stabbe, stump of a tree, ON. stabbi, a heap, a stack. The application of the name to a prop or support arises from regarding the prop as thrusting upwards against the weight imposed upon it. The staple of a door is the iron loop stuck into the door-post in order to hold the bolt of the lock. Sc. stapalis, fastenings.—Jam.

2. In a derivative sense staple is used for a market or emporium, the merchandise brought to be sold at such a market, the principal merchandise of a country, the materials of manufacture, raw material, substance of a thing.

The origin of these significations is Du. and Sw. stapel, a heap, and thence a place where goods are stored up or exposed for sale. Rouchi estapler, to expose goods for sale in public market; Champ. estape, estaple, shop, market; estapler une voiture, to stop a conveyance for the purpose of offering the goods for sale. Fr. estape, estaple, a public storehouse wherein merchant strangers lodge their commodities which they mean to vent; also a certain place whereto the country is enjoined to bring in provisions for a marching army; also the pecuniary contribution allowed by those towns or persons that bring in none.—Cot. Hence etape, resting-place, or soldier's allowance on march.

In the N. of France, and Germany, the term was applied to a privilege accorded to certain towns, by which they were entitled to stop all imported goods brought within their limits until they had been exposed to public sale for a definite period, and the name was also given to the towns possessed of such a privilege. Rouchi estaple, public exposure to sale. ' Le temps de l'estaple au lieu de deux heures devra durer toute la journée.' E. staple, a city or town where merchants jointly lay up their commodities for the better vending of them by the great; a public storehouse.—B.

Star. Gr. ἀστήρ, ἄστρον, Lat. astrum, Goth. stairno, Bret. steren, W. seren, a star; sêr, stars. Bret. stéreden, a star; stéredd or stéredennou, stars; stéredenni, to twinkle, glitter. In a similar manner appear to be formed W. serenu, to glitter, dazzle, sparkle; Du. sterren, to twinkle—Kil., ON. stirna, to glitter. But, on the other hand, nothing is more probable than that the stars should take their name from sparkling or glittering, and a root ser or ster having that signification appears in Lat. serenus, bright, clear, shining; Gr. ἀστροπή (ἀστεροπή), ἀστραπή (analogous to Champ. ablancer for balancer), a flash of lightning, flashing, glitter. See Stare.

Lat. Stella may perhaps be for sterula, but it may be direct from the root stel, parallel with ster, signifying, in the first instance, crack, then burst, scatter, sparkle, according to the analogy of Fr. éclat, which signifies, in the first place, the crack of an explosion, then fragment, glitter. Sp. estallar, to crack, to burst with a loud sound; estallo, crackling, crashing, sound of anything bursting or falling; OFr. estoile, estelle, éclat de bois, chip, splint, to be compared with estoile, a star; esteler, to flash like lightning.—Roquef.

Another instance of the name of a star being taken from the sense of sparkling is seen in Magy. tsillag, a star, compared with tsillogni, tsillámlani, to sparkle, glitter; G. schillern, to glance, play with different colours.

Starboard. ' The right side of the vessel. ON. stjornbordi, Da. styrbord; from stjorn, the rudder, Da. styre, to steer, because the rudder consisted of an oar on the right side of the ship, where the steersman stood.

Starch. See Stark.

To Stare. 1. To glitter, shine. 'Staryng or schynyng as gay thyngys, rutilans. Staryn or schynyn and glyderyn, niteo.'—Pr. Pm. Du. sterren, to twinkle.

As ai stremande sternes stared alle thaire wedes. K. Alex. p. 129.

Her fiery eyes with furious sparks did stare.—F.Q. See Star.

2. ON. stara, Sw. stirra, Du. staren, staroogen, to stare, gaze, look fixedly. N. stara, stira, are also used in the sense of simply looking, turning the eyes towards. Star, eyes, look, sight; brunt star, brown eyes.

As the act of looking consists only in opening the eyes for the reception of light, the senses of looking or gazing and of shining are often expressed by the same word, as in G. blick, a flash of light, a glance or look, and fig. the eye, looks. Swiss glare, to stare, is identical with E. glare, glow; OE. glare, glowr, to stare, with N. glora, to glitter, to stare. To stare then, in the sense of looking fixedly, may be a secondary application of stare, to shine. 'I stare, as a man's eyes stare for anger, mes yeulx s'allument.'—Palsgr. On the other hand, we have G. starr, stiff, rigid; ein starrer blick, a fixed look; starren, to be stiff; starren, an-starren, starr ansehen, to stare at. And certainly the verb to stare is used in this latter sense, when we speak of an ill-fed horse having a rough and staring coat. 'Aggricciamenti, astonishments, starings of one's hairs.'— Fl. Holstein sturr, stiff; sturre haar, rigid hair. ON. stargresi, Dan. stærgræs, star, sedge, rigid grass, growing by the sea or on moors, in E. provincially starr or bent. It. stora, a mat or hassock made of bents or sedge. Sw. stirra utfingren, to spread one's fingers; stirra med ögonen, to look wildly, to stare. Bav. storren, to project; der storren, the stump of a tree; Gael. sturr, rugged point of a hill; stur-rag, turret or pinnacle; sturrach, rugged, surly in temper.

Stark.—Starch. ON. sterkr, styrkr, OHG. starah, starh, G. stark, rigid, stiff, strong. Goth. gastaurkan, to dry up; ON. storkna, Du. storkelen, Swiss storchelen, to congeal, coagulate, thicken; Sw. storkna, provincially strogna, to choke. E. dial. stark, starky, stiff, dry.—Mrs B. The original sense is probably rugged, uneven in surface, an idea commonly expressed from the figure of a harsh, broken sound. Bret. straka, strakla, to crack, clap, crackle, rattle; strakel, stragel, the clapper of a mill; Bohem. ssterkati, sstrkati, sstrokotati, to rattle; Russ. strogat', strugat', to rake, scrape, plane; strog', rigid, hard, austere; Lith. stregti, to stiffen, to freeze. As the sense commonly passes through the idea of a broken movement before that of a broken surface, we must in all probability refer to the foregoing root such forms as E. straggle, struggle, and G. straucheln, Du. struikelen, to stumble; Bav. storkeln, starkeln, to stagger; E. dial. stark, to walk slowly, stump. Starch for stiffening linen is G. Stärke, strength, stiffness, starch. Sw. stärkelse, Du. stijfsel, starch.

To Start.—Startle. To start, to do anything with a sudden spring. At a stert, in a moment.—Chaucer. G. Sturz, a fall, tumble, start, spurt.—Küttn. Sein Pferd that einen Sturz, his horse started; sturzkarren, a tumbril or cart that tilts up. Sturz is also what projects abruptly, the stump of a tree, dock of a horse's tail, handle of a plough. Das Pferd stürzt die Ohren, the horse pricks his ears. Pol. storczyć, to raise or set up, to bristle, to prick up the ears; sterczeć, to stick out, protrude, jut out. G. Sturz am Pfluge, Pflugstert, plough-handle; E. dial. stert, tade of a plough, stalk of fruit; redstart, a bird with a red tail; Bav. Starz, tail of beasts, stalk. G. stürzen, to dash, to do things with a quick sudden motion, throw down, fall; Du. storten, to hurl or throw headlong, to tumble, fall, to shed or spill. Stortregen, a violent shower. G. eine tonne stürzen, as in E. nautical language, to start a cask, to spill the contents. The origin appears to be the clattering sound of dashing down. Bohem. sturcowati, to clatter, to empty out; E. dial. strat, to dash to pieces, to splash with mud; strat, a fall.—Hal. Comp. Bret. stlaka, straka, to clap; stlapa, to dash down. Swab. spritzen, to spirt. To startle, to sparkle.—Hal. 'Frizzare, to spirt, to frisk, to startle as good wine doth being poured into a glass, also to frisk or skip nimbly.'—Fl.

To Starve. In the Midland Counties to clem is to perish from hunger; to starve, to suffer from cold. I am starved, I am perished with cold. ON. starf, labour, trouble, inconvenience; starfa sik, to exert oneself. N. starva (of a sick or wearied beast), to go slow and tottering, to shrug like cattle in the cold, to go off, fall away, perish; starving, a slow and tottering gait. Du. sterven, G. sterben, to die. Compare AS. deorfan, to labour, painfully to exert oneself, to perish. Gedurfon heora scipa, their ships perished. Sw. sträfwa, to endeavour, to strive; sträfwan, work, pains. See Strife.

State.—Station.—Stature.—Statis-tic. From Lat. sto, statum, to stand, are formed statio, a station or standing-place; statura, stature; status -us, the standing, state or condition of a thing, and thence E. statist, one who examines the state of things.

Stationer. In Mid. Lat. and even in classical times (according to Muratori, Diss. 25), statio was applied to a stall or shop. It became appropriated to a seller of books and paper, &c., as grocer, which formerly signified a wholesale dealer, to a seller of spices. 'Datia (quod dant mercatores de locis in quo vendunt) staytgeld.'—Dief. Supp. An ordinance of A.D. 1408 prescribes, 'quod nullus libellus sive tractatus—amodo legatur in scolis—nisi per Universitatem Oxonii aut Cantabrigiæ primitus examinatur—et universitatis auctoritate stationariis tradatur ut copietur.' et factâ collatione vendatur justo pretio.'—Concil. Britan. Ed. Spelman in N. & Q., Jan. 12, 1861.
Statue. Lat. statua.
Statute, -stitut-. Lat. status, stand-ing, posture, gives rise to statuo, -utum (in comp. -stituo), to set, place, establish, ordain. Hence Constitute, Institute, &c.
* To Staw. To glut, to clog, to be restive, to refuse to draw.—Craven. Gl. Staud, surfeited, tired.—Hal.
Or olio that would siaw a sow.—Burns.
It is merely the broad pronunciation of stall, in the sense of standing-place ; to stall, to bring to a stand. Stalled, set fast in a slough, satiated, cloyed.—Mrs Baker.
As stille as a stone oure ship is stalled, Townely Myst.
Bav. stallen, Sw. stålla, to stop ; Piedm. stalé, to stop, to stanch.
Stave. 1. A different pronunciation of staff, appropriated by custom to certain modifications of the object, as a pole of some length, or one of the bars of which a cask is composed, ON. stafr, N. stav, a stick, pole, stave of a cask.
2. A stave in psalm-singing is a verse, or so much of the psalm as is given out at once by the precentor to be repeated by the congregation. Pl.D. staven, to recite the words of a formula that is to be repeated by another person, to admin-ister an oath ; een staveden eed, an oath solemnly administered.
In this sense the word is a met. from the construction of a hooped vessel by putting together the staves of which it is composed, and as each of these is separ-ately set up, so a stave is so much of the formula as is separately recited. ON. stafa einum eid, to administer to one an oath ; svâ stôfud sôk, a matter so con-stituted, so arranged. N. stava, to set up the staves in a cask, and thence fig. to set together the letters of which a written word is composed, to spell ; stavelse, a syllable, a separate element of a spoken word. It is obviously from this meta-phor also (and not, as commonly sup-posed, from the upright bar forming the body of the letter in the Runic alphabet) that we must explain ON. stafr, AS. staf, bocstæf, G. buchstab, a letter. ' Litera,' says Ælfric, ' is stæf on Englisc, and is se læsta dæl on bocum, and is untodæ-ledlic :' letter is stæf in English, and is the least element in writings, and is in-divisible. In the same way the stave is the ultimate element of a cask or tub.
STEAD and as the staves are separately useless until they are set up in the form of a vessel, so the letters are individually in-significant until set together in a word.
Stay. 1. ON., Da., Du., stag, Fr. estaye, the stay or strong rope that fastens the top of the mast to the bow of the vessel. ON. staga, to bind, to fasten. Bret. stag, a tie, fastening ; staga, to fasten. See Stanch.
2. Stay.—Staid. Stay, a prop, a sup-port, also a stop, let, or hindrance ; to stay, to support, to bear up, to stop, to continue in a place.—B.
The primary sense is that shown in ON. stoð, N. stöð, styd, Sw. stöd, stake, prop, support ; ON. stoða, to support, to help ; Du. staede, staeye (Kil.), Fr. estaye, a prop or supporter. Hence staid, stayed, sup-ported, steadied, kept firm.
The abbot who to all posterity did leave The fruits of his stay'd faith, delivered by his pen. Drayton.
Du. staeden, stabilire—Kil. ; Sw. stöda, stödja, to prop or support ; stödja sig, to rest, repose on ; N. stoð, stö, steady, continu-ous ; stöe se, to be steady. To stay, in the sense of hinder, prevent, stop, as when one speaks of staying one's hand, is a metaphor of the same kind as when we use help in the sense of abstain from, prevent. ' It cannot be helped.' In the same way from G. steuer, which properly signifies a stake, prop, support, is formed steuern, to stop, hinder, stay, keep back, avert.—Kütn.
Probably stay, in the sense of continue, remain unmoved, has come to us through the Romance. Lang. estaia, residence. ' Estaia farem ab lui :' mansionem apud eum faciemus. Prov. estar, to stand, to cease or abstain from action ; OFr. ester, esteir, to stand, remain, be.
The essential function of a stay or prop consists in the upward thrust by which it counteracts the weight of an incumbent body. Thus the immediate origin of the word may be found in G. stossen, Sw. stöta, Da. støde, to strike against, jog, thrust, strike endways, stamp, pound. In the same way from the secondary form G. stutzen, to dash against, to come to a stop, we have G. stütze, Sw. stötta, a prop or support. A conjecture as to the ulti-mate origin is given under Stilt.
Stead.—Steady.—Steadfast. Two words seem to be confounded in E. stead, viz. : 1. Goth. staðs, ON. staðr, stöð, Du., AS. stede, Da. sted, place, spot, properly standing ; ON. standa, stoð, staðit, to stand. Se stede is halig, this place is holy.—Jos. v. 15. Da. i steden, in the place of, instead of. From this sense of the word we have homestead, the home place; bedstead; G. bettstatt, bettstätte; ON. eldstadj; Cleveland, firestead, door-stead, meddenstead; ON. stadfastr. Da. stadfast, stedfast, standfast, E. steadfast, firm in its place; Sw. stadig, E. steady, standing in its place, stable; ON. stedja, to place, staddr, Sw. stadd, situated, placed, bestead. Wara stadd i fara, to be placed in danger. Icke wara stadd wid penningar, to be hard bestead for money.

2. Stead in the other sense corresponds to Du. staede, Sw. stöd, prop, stay, sup-port; ON. adstöd, assistance; stöda, to avail. From this sense of the word must be explained the expression, to stand one in good stead, exactly equivalent to the Du. te staede kommen, in staede staen.—Kil. See Stay.

Steak. Slices of meat to fry or broil.—B. ON. steikja, Dan. stege, to roast, broil, fry; ON. steikari, a cook. N.Fris. stajcken, to roast in the ashes. As roast seems originally to signify the rod on which the meat was stuck by way of a spit, so it is probable that steak is a modi-fication of stick or stake. OHG. stekko, pole, stake, stick, peg. Da. steg, a stake, pole, also a roast; at vende steg, to turn the spit. Sw. stek, roast meat.

Steal. A handle. See Stale.

To Steal. Goth. stilan, ON. stela.

Steam. AS. stem, vapour, smoke, smell. Du. stoom, dom, domp, damp (Kil.), steam, vapour. Boh. dym, smoke. Bav. daum, vapour, smoke; doamwint, moist warm wind. See Damp, Stew.

Steed. AS. steda, a horse or stallion. Gael. steud, to run, to race; a race, a wave; steudshruth, a rapid stream; steud-each, steud, a swift horse, racehorse, war horse; steudach, swift, billowy.

Steel. OHG. stahal, OberD. stahel, stachel, G. stahl, steel. Probably Wach-ter and Adelung are right in connecting it with stechen, to stick, and stachel, prick, point; analogous to It. acciaro, Fr. acier, steel, from acies, point, edge. When steel was first introduced it would be too valuable to be used for more than the edge of the weapon, and would be known as edge metal. Du. stael van het mes, the edge of a knife.—Kil. A similar con-traction is seen in OHG. stechal, Bav. stickel, G. steil, steep. Boh. staly, firm, stable, is unconnected.

To Steep. — Steep. — To Stoop. In different branches of the Gothic stock the syllables stap, stip, stup, convey the sense of striking end foremost, stabbing, stick-ing into, stamping, setting down the foot, throwing down, lowering, dipping or sink-ing into a liquid, soaking. We may cite ON. stappa, to stamp, to pound; N.Fris. stuppin, to strike against (stossen, Johans. p. 50); Du. stappen, stippen, to step, to set down the foot; stippen, to fix, to stick into, to embroider; G. stupfen, to goad, to prick; Pl.D. stup-pen, stippen, to strike the ground with a stick in walking; stipsiock, a walking-stick; stippen, also to dip; instippen, to dip the pen in ink. N.Fris. stiepen, to dip candles, Sw. stöpa, to dip candles, to cast metals, to steep seed or the like in water, to soak into, as ink into paper. The sense of soaking is incidental to that of dipping into liquid. ON. steypa, to cast or throw down, to pour out, to cast in metal; steypask, to cast oneself down or out of, to fall. N. stöypa, to cast down, stupa, to fall. Sw. stupa, to incline, to lower, to fall. Stupa en tunna, to tilt a cask; s. omkull, to drop down. Han stupade i slagtningen, he fell in battle. From the idea of tumbling to that of steepness or abrupt inclination is an easy step. The Lat. præceps, headlong, sig-nifies also sloping, steep. Sw. stupad, in-clined, leaning downwards; stupning, de-clivity. N. stup, a steep cliff; stupebratt, so abrupt that one may fall down. The stoop of a hawk is when he falls from a height upon his prey.

Steeple. AS. stypel, a tower; Sw. stapel, stocks on which a ship is built, a heap, a pile; klockstapel, a steeple or belfry; N. stupel, clock-tower; Pl.D. stipel, stiper, a prop, support, pillar. A pair of thick legs are called een paar gode stipels, to be compared with G. stapeln, to come striding along. See Staple. ON. stöpull, support, pillar, tower, steeple.

Steer.—Stirk. A young bull, ox, or heifer. Bav. ster, steren, sterch, sterchen, the male sheep or hog. OHG. stero, a ram. Swiss sterchi, a bull for breeding; stier, an ox calf. Gael. stuir, a male calf. G. stier, stierchen, a bull; stieren, to copu-late, of the bull and the ram. AS. styric, styrc, Du. stierick, heifer. N.Fris. stierl, sterl, yearling bull.

To Steer.—Stir. AS. styran, astyrian, to move, stir, steer, govern. Hit ne mihte that hus astyrian: it could not move that house.—Luke vi. 48. He styreth thone roder: he moves the sky. Osric that rice xigear styrde: ruled the realm eleven years. Eall that the styrath and leofath: all that moves and lives. ON. styra, to guide, steer, govern, control. OHG. stiuran, stiurjan, to direct, move, govern, control, also to prop, support, lean on. Du. stieren, stueren, to drive forwards, impel, propel.—Bigl. Kilian renders it, agere, adigere, agere navigium, subigere navem conto, promovere navem. Stierboom, contus nauticus, trudes, pertica nautica. The sense here indicated, of poling a boat or pushing it along with the help of poles would seem to be the original meaning of the word, as it reconciles several applications, apparently unconnected. We have OHG. stiura, baculus, stipes, remus — Graff; Bav. steuer, a prop, support, aid, contribution; ON. staurr, Sw. stór, a stake or pole; E. dial. stour, stower, a stake, a boathook; OHG. stiurle, störlen, fischerstorl, a fisher's pole for stirring the water, or fishing-rod.—Dief. Supp. in v. contus. Gr. σταυρός, a stake, pole, pale, afterwards the cross or stake on which a criminal was crucified. The use of a pole for a somewhat different purpose gives Du. stooren, to stir up the mud or shallows, to disturb, impede, to stir up, irritate, excite—Kil.; G. stören, to poke, rake into, stir up, disturb; Sw. störa, to trouble, interrupt, hinder, molest; also to place stakes, to support; Bav. stüren, to poke, as with a stick in the mud, with a finger in the nose, &c.; zandstürer, a toothpick.

Stem. 1. AS. stemn, G. stamm, the stem or trunk of a tree. E. dial. stelms, stembles, shoots that grow from an old stock; staums, stalks.—Mrs B. Lith. stambas, the stock or stem of a cabbage or the like; stambras, stalk of grass; Lett. stõbrs, stalk of grass, shaft of anchor. ODu. stapel, stalk. Lat. stipes, any piece of wood standing in the ground, a pale, stake, trunk of a tree; stipula, a stem, stalk, straw; Bohem. stopka, the stalk of a leaf, fruit, &c. Fr. estampeau, a prop, stay, trestle. Rouchi, s'étamper, to keep upright, to support. G. stämmen, to sustain, prop, stay or bear up; sich stämmen, to lean or rest against something.

The stem is the part of the plant which thrusts or shoots upwards and supports the boughs and whole produce of the plant. From the root stab, signifying thrust. Sanscr. stambh, to stop, support; stambha, a pillar, post, stem.

2. The stem of a ship (AS. stefn, stemn, ON. stafn, Da. stavn) is that great pile of timber which is wrought compassing from the keel below, and serves to guide the ship's rake.—B. The parts of this timber that turn upwards before and behind are in Sw. called framstam and bakstam, the prow and poop respectively. In E. the name of stem has been retained only in the case of the former. 'From stem to stern.' N. stemm, the stem or prow of a vessel. ODu. steve, a staff; the handle of a plough; steve, veursteve, the stem or prow of a ship; achtersteve, stern.

To Stem. 1. To stop, to put a stop to.—B. To resist, as when we speak of stemming the flood. ON. stemma, to stop, close, bar, dam. At ósi skal á stemma: a river must be stopped at its source. Stemma stigu fyrir einum: to bar the way before one.

From a modification of the root stap, signifying thrust, endlong blow, the final p of which is first nasalised and then absorbed: stap, stamp, stam. ON. stappa, to stamp, to pound; Sc. stap, to stop, obstruct, to cram, to stuff. Prov. destapar, to unstop. 'Lo bondonel destapa,' he draws the cork. Sp. destapar, to unstop, uncover. Lith. stabdyti, to stop.

The nasalised form is seen in E. stamp, to strike an endlong blow; Rouchi stamper, to support. Etampe-ti cont' l' mur: support yourself against the wall. S'étamper, to stand upright. When the thrust is sufficiently violent, the implement is stuck into the obstacle by which it is met, and the act assumes the aspect of striking or fixing, fastening, stopping. Prov. estampir, tampir, to shut, to stop. 'Una porta—que fon barrada et estampida dedins:' a door that was barred and shut within. The terminal p is finally absorbed in G. stämmen, stemmen, to plant, to stick something on or against an object with sudden thrust, as a stick upon the ground, the elbow on a table, the feet against a wall, the foot or knee upon an adversary's breast—Sanders; to stem, resist, bear up against, to sustain, support, prop.—Kuttn.

'Sich gegen etwas stemmen:' to bear up against it. 'Sich empor stemmen:' to raise oneself up by leaning on one's elbow, &c. (to be compared with Rouchi s'étamper). 'Sass ich aufgestemmt in meinem bette;' I sat supported in my bed. Sw. stämma, to stop, stanch, to hem or border.

A parallel series of similar forms, differing only in the want of an initial s, may be found under Dam. Lang. tapa, tampa, to stop, shut, inclose, surround; ON. teppa, to stop, to close; Pol. tamować, to stop, to dam, to check, restrain.

2. To stem is sometimes used in a different sense derived from ON. stefna or stemna, to turn the stem towards, to move in a certain direction. Hafa eit fyrir stafni, to have an object before the stem, to stem towards it, to move in that direction. Their stefndu inn í fjörðin : they steered in towards the firth.
They on the trading flood—Ply stemming nightly towards the pole.—Milton. Sw. stäfwa, to direct one's course towards a point. N. stemna, course, direction, appointment, a number of ships coming at an appointed time. A colliery is said to have a large stem on when there are a number of ships waiting for cargo, N.E. Steven, an appointed time ; to set the Steven, to agree upon a time and place of meeting. In Cornwall, stem, stemming, an appointed task, a day's work.
Stench. See Stink.
Stent. An allotted portion, a right of pasturage [for a definite number of cattle] —Hal. Stent, portion, part. —Palsgr. Stente or certeyne of value or dette and other lyke, taxatio ; stentyd, taxatus.—Pr. Pm. The day's work of a collier is called his stent in Staffordshire. Mid.Lat. extendere, OFr. estendre, to estimate.—Roquef. ' Hæc est extenta terrarum de terris et tenementis Prioris de Derhurst quantum valeant.'—Monast. Ang. ' Par mesmes les jourours soient les terres estendues à la very value.'—Duc.
Stentorian. Having a voice like Stentor, the crier of the Greeks at Troy.
Step. —Stamp. Du. stap, baculum, gradus, passus ; stappen, to step, to set down the foot. ON. stappa, to stamp, to thrust with a pole or the like. Their stöppuðu snjóinn með spjótsköptum sínum : they beat down the snow with their spear-shafts. Stappa fœtinum í jörðina, to stamp with their feet on the earth. N. stampa, to stamp, to tramp in wet or mud ; stappa, to pound, to stuff in, cram full ; stapp, pounded or mashed food. G. stapfen, to step, to tread hard. Gr. στείβω, to stamp, tread, ram down. Pol. stąpać, to step, stride ; stopa, sole of the foot. See Stab.
Step-father.—Step-son. The original application of the term is to a step-child, signifying an orphan, a child deprived of one at least of its parents, and is thence extended to a person marrying a widow or widower with children, coming in the place of father or mother to orphan children. Sie bearn his asteapte, in another version, syn bearn his steopcild, may his children be orphans.—Ps. cviii. 9. Ne læte ic eow steopcild, ego non vos orbos relinquam.—Joh. xiv. 18. Ofhreow him þæt asteapede wif, miserabat eum orbatae mulieris. OHG. stiuf, steof, step (-father, -child, &c.) ; stiufan, orbare ; arstiufan, viduare ; bestiuftiu, orphani.—Graff.
The origin may perhaps be shown in ON. stufr, a stump, whence styfa, to cut short ; styfdr, cropped, cut short. OSw. stuf, stubbe, a stump ; stubba, stufwa, to cut short.
Stereo-. Gr. στερεός, firm, solid ; as in Stereotype (fixed type), Stereoscope, &c.
Sterile. Lat. sterilis.
Sterling. Originally a name of the English penny, the standard coin in which it was commonly stipulated that payment should be made ; it was subsequently applied to the coinage of England in general; and metaphorically came to signify, of standard value, genuine, sound. ' Denarius Angliæ qui vocatur Sterlingus.'—Stat. Edw. I. in Duc. ' Moneta nostra, videlicet sterlingi, non deferatur extra regnum.'—Stat. David II. Scot. ' In this year (1351) William Edginton—made the kyng to make a new coyne—distroying alle the elde sterlynges which were of gretter wight.'—Capgr. Chron. 214. ' In centum marcis bonorum novorum et legalium sterlingorum tredecim solid. et 4 sterling, pro qualibet marcâ computetis.' —Chart. H. III. in Duc.
The origin of the name is unknown. Some suppose it to be from the coin having had a star on the obverse, the objection to which is that there is no evidence of any coin in which the star occupied a place sufficiently marked to give a name to the coin. There are indeed pennies of King John on which there is a star or sun in the hollow of a crescent with other emblems, but it is a very inconspicuous object. Others suppose that the name was given to coins struck at Stirling in Scotland. But the hypothesis most generally approved is that the coin is named from the Easterlings or North Germans, who were the first moneyers in England. Walter de Pinchbeck, a monk of Bury in the time of Ed. I., says, ' Sed moneta Angliæ fertur dicta fuisse a nominibus opificum, ut Floreni a nominibus Florentiorum, ita Sterlingi a nominibus Esterlingorum nomina sua contraxerunt, qui hujusmodi monetam in Anglia primitus componebant.' The assertion however merits as little credit in the case of the Sterling as of the Florin. We do not even know when the name originated.
Stern. I. Sc. stourne, stern.

Ac wile Hunger was here mayster wolde non chide, Ne stryve agens the statute, he loked so sturne.
P. P. ON. stura, sorrow, disturbance; stúrinn, N. sturen, sturall, sorrowful, cast down, disturbed; Du. stuer, torvus, austerus, ferox; stooren, to disturb, trouble; Sc. stour, disturbance, battle, conflict.
2. Stern, the steerage or afterpart of a ship. From ON. styra, to steer, direct, rule; styri, the rudder; stiorn, govern- ance, rule, rudder; stjórna, to steer, to govern. OHG. stiura, Du. stuur, rudder.
Himself as skippare hynt the stere on hand.
D. V. See Steer.
Stew. I. Sc. stew, vapour, smoke, dust.
All thair flesche of swait was wate. And sic a stew raiss owt off thaim then. Of aneding [aynding, breathing] bath of horss and men And off powdyr, that sic myrknes Intill the ayr abowyne thaim wes.—Barbour
Millstew, G. mühlstaub, the dust of a mill. Stew, when the air is full of dust, smoke, or steam.—Grose; dust, pother, disturbance, 'What a stew you are making.' Figuratively, a state of vexa- tion and perplexity, 'I was in a fine stew.'—Mrs Baker. Goth. stubjus, Pl.D. staff, G. staub, dust; OHG. stoupon, turbare; stubbi, Bav. stubb, stupp, dust, powder.
It would seem that dust, smoke, vapour, is originally conceived as the suffocating agent, and is named from stopping the breath, and, in the first instance, from sticking or thrusting into. Thus we have Lat. stipare, to cram, press, stuff; It. stipare, stivare, to pack, ram in hard, to stop chinks; Du. stuwen, to ram, to stow; E. dial. stive, to push with poles, to stuff, to choke. A road is said to be stivven up when it is so full of snow as to be impassable; to be stived up, to be stifled up in a warm place; stiving, close, stifling. 'Sweep gently or you will stive us.' [Hence stive, dust.—Mrs Baker. For the identity of stive and stew, compare skewer and skiver; E. dive and Du. duwen, douwen. 'The room was so warm I was quite stewed.'—Mrs B. Stives, stews or brothels.—Hal.
A series of parallel forms without the initial s is seen in Du. douwen, duwen, to push, stick into; It. tuffare, to dip, duck, plunge in water, to smother; Sp. tufo, choking vapour, Lang. toufo, oppressive heat; tubós, fog, mist; Gr. τῦφος, smoke, mist, cloud; ON. dupt, dust; Da. duft, fragrance; Grisons toffar, tuffar, to stink.
2. Stew, a place to keep fish in alive for present use. 'They take a milter out of their steeves or pooles where they use to keep them.'—Holland, Plinie in R. Pl.D. stauen, to stop, to dam; stau, a dam; Pol. staw, a pond; stawidlo, a floodgate.
To Stew.—Stove.—Stews. It. stuva, stufa, stua, Prov. estuba, ON. stofa, Sw. stufwa, OHG. stupa, G. stube, Pl.D. stove, stave, E. stove, a heated confined space, heated room, hot-bath; the notion of heat being incidental merely, on the same principle on which we speak of a room being close when we mean that it is too hot. Piedm. stua, a stove or hot closet, also the wadding of a gun, what is rammed down to keep the powder tight. Pl.D. veile stoven, venal chambers, a bagnio or stews, a brothel.
From the noun is formed the verb Fr. estuver, to stew, soak, bathe; It. stufare, stuvare, stuare, to bathe and sweat in a stove or hothouse, to stew meat in a close covered pot or pan—Fl.; Sw. stufwa, Pl.D. staven, stoven, to stew. G. stauchen, to jog, thrust, stick into, stop the flow of water, is also used in the sense of stewing meat; to cram it into a confined space. Stauchen einen, to poke one in the ribs; sich aufs bett hinstauchen, to lean on the bed.—Schmeller. It. stufare, to glut or satiate, is also from the original sense of stuffing or thrusting into.
Steward. ON. stivardr, the person whose business it is to look to the daily work of an establishment, from stjá, N. sti, domestic occupation, especially the foddering the cattle; stia, to be busy about the house, especially in taking care of cattle, to bring the cattle to the house. ON. stia, sheephouse.
To Stick. The radical image is a shock or sharp blow, a thrust with a pointed implement, which is driven into, and remains fixed in, a solid obstacle. Hence the idea of stoppage, cessation. When the action is considered with re- ference to the source from which it pro- ceeds, rather than the end to which it is directed, we are led to the notion of pro- jection, of something sticking sharply out of the surrounding surface. The radical sense is seen in Pol. stuk, noise made by striking with something hard; stukać, to make such a noise, to knock; Bret. stok, a knock or shock; steki, to knock; Sc. stock, to thrust. We have then Du. steken, G. stecken, to stick into, to put a ring on one's finger or money into one's hand, to stick a sword in the sheath, to stab one with a sword, to stick fast, to come to a stand. Im kothe stecken, to stick in the mud. Die sache steekt, the thing is stopped. Sich stecken, of water, to be stopped, to cease to flow; steckhusten, a choking cough. In Scotland a stickit minister is one who has failed to pass his examination. To stick or stekc, to stab, to stitch, to fix or fasten, and thence to close, to shut. To steek the door, to shut it. ' He steeked his eyne, his neive :' shut his eyes, his fist. To steek is also to stop, to choke.

And Bannokburn betwix the braes Off men, off horss swa stekyt wais.—Barbour.

ON. stika, to dam. E. dial. slagged, slogged, stuck in the mire. It. stuccare, to stanch, stop or close up, to glut or cloy (Fl.), also to stop masonry with a composition of lime, to parget. Da. stikke, to prick, stick, stab, stitch.

Alongside the verb we have G. stock, stecken, a staff or stick, an implement for thrusting; It. stocco, a thrusting sword, also a short truncheon or cudgel, stecco, stecca, a stick, lath, splinter; N. stikka, a stick, pin, point, prick.

Stickler.—To Stickle. Sticklers were persons appointed on behalf of each of the parties in a combat to see that their party had fair play, and to part the combatants when occasion required. Hence to stickle for, to maintain one's rights to a thing. ' I styckyll between wrastellers or any folkes that prove mastries to see that none do other wronge, or I part folke that be redy to fight : je me mets entre deux.'—Palsgr. 'Advanced in court, to try his fortune with your prizer, so he have fair play shown him, and the liberty to chuse his stickler.'—B. Jon., Cinthia's Revels.

The proper reading of the word should be stightlers, as signifying those who have the arrangement or disposition of the field, from AS. stihtian, OE. stihtle, to govern or dispose. ' Thas the Willelm weolde and stihtle Englelond :' from the time that W. wielded and ruled E.

Thaze he be a sturn knape To stihtl and stad with stave, Full well con drystyn schape His servauntes for to save. Sir Gawaine and the Green Knight, 2136.

When Gawaine goes to keep his appointment with the green knight in the chapel of the wood, he asks, Who stihtles here? who rules, who is the master here?

If we leven the layk of owre layth synnes. And stylle steppen in the stythe he styhtles hym-selven, He will wende of his wodschip and his wrath leve:

if we step in the path he himself appoints.—Morris, Alliterative Poems.

In accordance with the above the word is written stiteler in the Coventry Mysteries, p. 23.

This is the watyre abowte the place, if any dyche may be made, ther it schal be played : or ellys that it be strongly barryd al abowte, and lete nowth over many stitelerys be withinne the plase.

Stiff. G. steif, Dan. stiv. From the same source with slab, staff, stub, Lat. stipes, &c. ; what projects, stands abruptly out, unbending, unyielding. Swiss staben, gestaben, to be stiff with cold ; gestabet, stiff; met. uncultivated; stabi, a clown. Pl.D. stävig, stiff, staff-like. Lith. stipti, to become stiff with cold, or in death ; stiprus, strong. Let. staibus, strong, brave. In like manner Esthon. kang, a bar, lever, pole ; kange, hard, stiff, strong, great.

The sense of stiffness may however be attained from the notion of stuffing or thrusting in. Gr. στέμβω, to stamp; στεμφός, strong, stiff, thick ; στεμφικός, στεμφύλος, στέμφυλος, στεμφός, close, solid, rugged, harsh; στεμφόω, to make stiff; στεμφρός, pressed close, compact, solid, strong ; στίθος, anything pressed firm. Lat. stipare, to cram, stuff, pack close ; It. stipare, stivare, to ram in hard ; Du. stijven, to stiffen. Dat stijft de beurs, that fills the purse. E. steeve, to stow cotton by forcing it in with screws, to stiffen, to dry.—Hal. Sc. stive, steeve, firm, compact, trusty.

To Stifle. To stop the breath. ON. stifla, to stop, to dam ; stifla, a stoppage, as of the nose, of water. Fr. estouper, to stop, to close ; estouffer, to stifle, smother, choke. E. stuff, to ram, to thrust in. G. stopfen, to stuff, to stop. Bret. stoufa, stouva, stefia, stevia, to cork, stop a bottle. Gr. στέφω, to draw together, to compress. E. dial. stify, a suffocating vapour ; stify, stifling.

Stigma.—Stigmatise. Gr. στίγμα, a mark or brand, from στίζω, to prick in, to brand ; στιγματίζω, to mark with στίγματα.

-stil.—Still. Lat. stillare, to drop, fall in drops ; as in Distil, Instil.

Stile, AS. stigel, gradus, scala, from stigan, to climb, to mount. A stile is a contrivance for stepping over a fence. Pl.D. stegel, stiegsel, steps in a wall for getting over; Bav. stigel, a stile.

Stiletto. Lat. stylus, stilus, a bodkin or pointed implement to write with ; It. stile, a pricker, knitting needle, goad, index of a dial ; stiletto, a pocket dagger.

* Still, adj. and adv. Without movement, and thence, without sound, or voice versä. G. still stehen, to stand still; still schweigen, to be totally silent. By those who regard the absence of movement as the original idea, the word is connected with G. stelle, place, standing-place. Das pferd will nicht von der stelle, the horse stands still, will not stir; stellen, to place, settle, order or regulate something. Der hund stellet ein wild, the game stands still before the dog; Eine uhr stellen, to set or regulate a clock; steller, the regulator; ON. stilla, to arrange, moderate, direct, to tune an instrument, to stop a horse. Da. stille, to place, set, station, to set a watch, to level a gun, also to stop, still, quell, appease; stilles, to subside, abate. Grimm supposes a primitive verb, stillan, stall, stullun, to rest, whence OHG. stil, quiet, still; stillî, silence. Gr. στέλλω, to set in order, arrange, dispatch.

On the other hand, the hushing of a person to silence affords the most lively image of calm and quiet, and a plausible origin is suggested in the interj. of silence, St! Du. een stille geruisch, a soft noise. Stil! zeg ik. Peace! I say. But this suggestion again is opposed to forms like Lith. tylus, quiet, still; tilti, to be silent; tildyti, to still, to quiet; tyld, silence; Pol. tulić, utulić, to calm, quiet, soothe.

Stilt. G. stelzen, Du. stilten, stilts; stilte, a wooden leg; Bav. stelzen, a prop, stilt; stelzen, to prop, to go on stilts or on wooden legs, to strut; Sw. stulta, to totter; stylta, stilt, prop, stay, support.—Widegren. Sc. stilt, to halt, limp, go on crutches; stilt of a plough, the plough-handle.
The common element in the foregoing significations seems to be the thrust exerted through the stilt, crutch, or support, and perhaps the type from which the designation is originally taken may be the abrupt exertion of the voice in impeded speech, the broken efforts of the muscular frame in staggering or stumbling being constantly signified by the same terms with the analogous exertions of the voice in stuttering or stammering. Thus we pass from E. stotter, stutter, to Sc. stot, stoit, steet, stoiter, Yorkshire stauter, to stagger, stumble, Sw. stöta, to jolt, knock, dash, thrust, G. stutzen, to knock or dash against, to start, and from thence to Sc. stut, steet, Du. stut, Sw. stötta, G. Stütze, a prop or support.
Again, the broad sound of the a in Yorkshire stauter corresponds to the introduction of an l in Bav. stalzeln, to stutter, from whence we pass as above to G. stelze and E. stilt. The l is introduced

STINT in a similar manner in Du. stalpen (Kil.), to stamp, compared with stappen, to step, to stalk; in G. stolpern, to stumble, compared with Sw. stappla, to stammer, stumble, and in E. stalk, compared with OE. staker, to stutter, stagger, or Da. dial. stagge, stagle, to stagger.
Stimulate. — Stimulus. Lat. stimulus, a prick, goad.
Sting. ON. stanga, stinga, Da. stikke, stinge, OHG. stungan, stingan, to butt, stick, thrust, prick. A nasalised form of the same root with stick.
Stingy. 'Pinching, sordid, narrow-spirited. I doubt whether it be of ancient use or original, and rather think it to be a newly-coined word.'—Sir Thos. Brown. It is explained in the New Dict. of the terms ancient and modern of the Canting Crew, by B. E. Gent (1710), as 'covetous, close-fisted, sneaking.' The word is probably a corruption of skingy, used in Linc., in the same sense, also in Suffolk in that of cold, nipping. To skinch, to give scant measure, to nip and squeeze, and pinch and pare.—Hal. Skinch, a small bit. 'Just give me a skinch of your cake.' Skinching, nip-ping, niggardly, parsimonious.—Mrs. B. Lincoln, kinch, a small bit; OE. chinche, Fr. chiche, pinching, niggardly, sparing; chic, a small piece. De chic à chic, from little to little.—Cot. It. cica, any little jot.
Stink. — Stench. OHG. stinchan, to smell sweet, or the converse. 'Er stinchet suozo:' he smells sweet. AS. stenc, smell, fragrance. 'Blostman stences:' blossoms of fragrance. Stencian, to scatter, sprinkle. ON. stokkva, to spring or cause to spring, to sprinkle. 'Blóð stökk ór nösunom:' blood sprang from his nose. Sw. stinka, to spring; stinkfjäder, a steel spring; stinka, also to stink; stänka, to sprinkle. N. stekka, to crack, to chip. Smell seems to be considered as arising from the exhalation of odoriferous particles springing from the odorous body and spreading abroad in the air.
To Stint. To cut short, to stop. Styntyn' of werkynge or mevynge, pauso, desisto.—Pr. Pm. ON. stuttr, short; stytta, to shorten; stytta upp, to stop raining. OSw. stunt, short; stunta, to shorten. G. stutz, stutze, anything cropped or docked, or short of its kind; stutzen, to crop, dock, curtail. The radical meaning of stutz seems to be a jog or sudden movement; stutzen, to butt at, to hit, to knock, to start; auf den stutz, on a sudden. From the notion of a jog we pass to that of a projection or stump, then of something stumpy or short.
Stipend. Lat. stipendium, pay; stips, small money, contributions, alms.
Stipulate. Lat. stipulor, to covenant or engage, probably from a straw (sti-pula) being emblematically used in making the engagement.
Stirrup. AS. stigerap, G. steigreif, a rope or strap for mounting on horseback; stigan, G. steigen, to mount, and rap, rope, G. reif, a ring or hoop, as well as cord or rope.
Stitch. A modification of stick, signi-fying a prick, a sharp pain. G. sticken, to embroider.
Stithe. AS. stith, stithelic, hard, severe, rigid; stithferhth, firm-minded. Appar-ently connected with N. styd, a pole, prop, support, on the same principle on which stiff is connected with staff, or Fin. kan-kia, rigid, with kanki, a stake or bar. Du. stedigh, steegh, firm, fixed, steady, obsti-nate, restive.
Stithy. ODu. stiete—Kil.; ON. stedi, Sw. städ, an anvil.
-stitute. See Statute.
Stoat. A stallion horse.—B.; also a weasel, from a supposed analogy. Du. stuyte, equus admissarius, vulgo stuotus.—Kil. Dan. stodhingst, a stallion; AS. stodhors, stotarius.
Stock. The ultimate origin of the word in a representation of the sound of striking with something hard, by the syllable stok, stuk, has been explained under Stick. Hence arose a verb signify-ing to thrust, stab, strike endways, drive into, fasten; and a noun signifying the implement of thrusting or stabbing, for which is required something long, straight, and rigid, as a stick, the stem of a tree, the part that shoots or thrusts upwards.
The course of development may be traced through Bret. stok, jog, shock, knock, blow; Rouchi dtoquer, to knock; Hereford stock, to peck; Sc. stock, to thrust; Yorksh. stoche, to stab; stoach, stolch, to poach, tread into wet land as cattle in winter; Fr. estoquer, to thrust or stab into; Rouchi estoquer, to stick into a soft material; E. stoke, to poke the fire; G. stocker, a poker, picker; Rouchi stiquer, to poke, to stick. I stique toudi au feu; he is always poking the fire. We have then Fr. estoc, a thrust or thrusting sword, the stock of a tree; It. stoccata, a thrust in fencing; G. stock, a stick, staff, stem of a plant or tree, stump of a felled tree, a short thick piece or block; almo-senstock, a trunk in churches in which alms were put. From this last must be explained the Stocks or public funds, re-ceptacles opened by the state authorities, into which the contributions of the public might be poured as into the charity trunk in churches. Stocks or gilliflowers are to be explained by Du. stock-violiere, leu-coion, viola lutea et muraria, q. d. viola lignescens sive in baculum crescens—Kil., stem- or stalk-violets (violet being taken as the type of a sweet-smelling plant), as contrasted with the humble growth of the true violet. The stockdove is the wild kind, the stock or stem from whence the tame pigeon is supposed to be derived. In the same way, Sc. stockduck, G. stockente, wild duck; stockerbse, wild peas.
The stocks is a wooden frame in which a prisoner is stocked or set fast.
Rather die I would, and determine As thinketh me now, stocked in prisoun. Chaucer.
Sw. stockhus, prison; G. stocken, to stick, stagnate, stop. Das blut, die milch stockt; curdles, congeals. Gael. stocaich, grow stiff or numb; Lincoln. stockened, stopped in growth. Rouchi etoquer, to choke. A ship is stoaked when the water cannot come to the pump.—B.
Stocking. The clothing of the legs and lower part of the body formerly con-sisted of a single garment, called hose, in Fr. chausses. It was afterwards cut in two at the knees, leaving two pieces of dress, viz.: knee-breeches, or, as they were then called, upperstocks, or in Fr. haut de chausses, and the netherstocks or stockings, in Fr. bas de chausses, and then simply bas. In these terms the element stock is to be understood in the sense of stump or trunk, the part of a body left when the limbs are cut off. In the same way G. strumpf, a stocking, properly sig-nifies a stump. 'Mit strump und wurzel:' with stump and root. Strump, strump-fung, a short length cut off a strip of land.—Sanders. An r is inserted or left out in many of these forms without change of meaning, as in the foregoing strump and E. stump; Pl.D. strumpeln and the synonymous E. stumble; Du. strobbe, a shrub or bush, and E. stub; the Pl.D. dim. struddik and E. stud, G. staude, a shrub; G. strampfen and E. stamp.
Stoic. Gr. στοά, a portico; στωϊκός, of a portico, whence a Stoic, a follower of Zeno the philosopher, who taught in the portico called Pæcile at Athens.
Stole. Lat. stola, from Gr. στολή, a robe.

Stolid. Lat. solidus, dull, foolish.
Stomach. Gr. στόμα, mouth ; στόμαχος (properly mouth, opening), the throat or gullet, the orifice of the stomach, neck of the bladder, stomach itself.
Stone. AS. Stan, ON. sten, G. stein.
Stook. A shock of corn of 12 sheaves. From G. stauchen, to jog, is formed stauch, Pl.D. stuke (properly a projection), a heap or bunch. Stauchen einen, to poke one in the ribs. Ein stauch Flachs, a bundle of flax ; ene stuken torf, a heap of turfs set out to dry. Rouchi stoc, estoque, a shock or stook. Bohem. stoh, a heap, a hay-cock.
Stool. 1. Goth. stols, OHG. stuol, Gael. stòl, W. ystol, a stool, seat. OHG. stuol, stol, also a support ; G. stollen, a prop, foot, post; Pl.D. stale, foot of a table, &c.; Du. voetstal, It. pedestale, a pedestal. Russ. stul, a stool, a block ; Lith. stalas, Pol. stol, a table. Pol. stolek, Boh. stolec, a seat, throne, bench ; Serv. stola, seat, throne, table. See Stall.
2. Stool, a cluster of stems rising from one root ; to stool, to ramify as corn. An old stool is a stump that sends up fresh suckers. Manx sthol, sprout or branch forth, grow in many stalks from one root. Lat. stolo, -nis, a shoot, sucker.
Stoop. A drinking vessel. See Stoup.
To Stoop. See To Steep.
To Stop. The radical idea is stabbing, striking endways, thrusting a lengthened implement into an orifice which it fills up, or into the substance of a body in which it sticks fast. N. stappa, to stamp, pound, stuff, cram ; stappa, cramfull; Sc. stap, to stuff, to obstruct or stop. ' The meal-kist was bienly stappit.' Stapalis, fastenings ; stappil, a stopper ; Du. stoppen, to stuff, to bring to a stand ; G. stopfen, to stuff, cram, close a hole ; Fr. estouper, to stop, close, shut ; estoupillon, a stopper ; estoupe, tow, the material for stopping or stuffing, showing the origin of Lat. stupa, Gr. στύπη, Du. stoppe, stopsel, tow. Mod. Gr. στύφω, to squeeze ; στύψις, astringency, alum ; στυπτήρι, a press ; στουπώνω, to stop up; στουππί, tow ; στουμπάρδω, to pound, force in or fix.
Store. Fr. estorer, to erect, build, store, garnish, furnish.—Cot. Estor, marriage provision ; estorement, provisions, furniture ; Norm. estorer, to provide. There is no doubt that it is the same word with Lat. instaurare, to repair, renew, provide, by which it is rendered in Mid.Lat. : ' Et reddat haeredi cum ad plenam æstatem venerit terram suam totam instauratam de carucis et omnibus aliis rebus : ' provided or stored with.—Magna Charta. It may be doubted however whether the word is not immediately derived from a Teutonic source. ON. staurr, Sw. står, a stake, pole, pillar ; OHG. stiura, a stake, pole, prop, and thence aid, assistance, contribution. Bausteur, brandsteur, contribution towards building a house, towards loss by fire ; wegsteur, viaticum, provision for a journey.—Schmeller. OHG. heristiura, expeditio, may be compared with OFr. estoree, fleet, naval expedition; G. aussteuer, marriage portion, with Fr. estor above-mentioned. On the same principle may be explained Lat. instauro, from Gr. σταυρός, a Stake.
Stork. A bird remarkable for its stalking gait and long legs. Dan. storken stalker i mose : the stork stalks in the fen. N.Fris. staurke, to strut; Dorset. stark, to walk slowly ; Bav. störkeln, to stalk, walk with long legs ; störkel, man with long legs or long thin body ; a fish-ing rod ; sterken, a stalk. ' Der truncken starckelt auf den Füssen : ebrius titubat pedibus.'—Gl. in Schm. The ultimate origin is seen in Bret. strak, a crack ; strakla, to crackle ; whence we pass to E. strike, on the one side, and G. straucheln, Du. struikelen, to stumble, stagger, on the other, and thence by inversion of the r to the foregoing forms. See Stalk.
Storm. Du. storm, rumor, strepitus, tumultus vehemens; impetus, procella, nimbus ; stormen, tumultuare, strepere, oppugnare, impetum facere. It. stormo, a storm, a rumbling noise, a blustering uproar, a confused rout or crue.—Fl. Stormare, to storm, rumble, rumour, noise, to troop together tumultuously, to make an uproar.
Story. 1. Fr. histoire, Lat. historia, a relation.
2. The height of one floor in a building. Probably from Fr. estorer, to construct, build, although I cannot find that estorée was used in the sense of E. story. Hii bygonne her heye tounes strengthy vaste aboute, Her castles and storys that hii myȝt be ynne in doute.—R. G. p. 181.
Stound. Hour, time, season, also mis-fortune.—B. Properly a blow. AS. stinian, to dash, strike. So tyl hys hart stoundis the pryk of deith.—D. V. Sc. stound (a stab), a sharp pain affecting one at intervals. When I was hurte thus, in stounde [at the moment] I fell doune plat upon the grounde.—R. R. 1733. OHG. stunt, a moment ; Du. terstond, im.

mediately, upon the spot. Pl.D. upstund, at present. OE. stoundmele, at intervals, from one moment to another. In G. stund, an hour, the word has acquired the sense of a definite interval of time.

Stoup. AS. stoppa, Du. stoop, N. staup, a flagon or drinking vessel. N. staup also, as well as stava, Sw. stâfwa, is a milking-pail or wooden vessel with one stave prolonged in order to form the handle, a peculiarity from which the vessel probably takes its name. NE. stap, staup, the stave of a tub.— Hal. In the same way stonk, the handle of a pail, also a drinking-cup with a handle.— Hal. Suffolk stawk, the handle of a whip.

Stout. OFr. estout, Du. stout, bold, proud ; stouthertigh, stout-hearted ; G. stolz, proud, stately, fine.

Stove. See Stew.

To Stow. I. Da. stuve, Du. stouwen, stuwen, G. stauen, stauchen, to push, to stow or thrust wares together in packing. Gr. στείβειν, to stamp, tread, stamp tight ; Lat. stipare, to pack together, cram, stuff, make close ; It. stipare, stivare, to stop chinks, to store or pile up close as they do packs in ships ; Mod. Gr. στίβα, heap-ing together ; στίβα τοῦ καραβίου, the stow-ing of a ship ; στιβάζειν, to heap together, stow, pack.

2. To lop or top trees. Stowd, cropt, as a horse's ears ; stowings, loppings ; stowlin, a lump of meat. The meaning is, to reduce to a stump. ON. stufr, a stump ; Sw. stuf, Pl.D. stuw (Danneil), a remnant. ON. stufa, a female slave whose ears have been stowd or cropt for theft; Pl.D. stûf, blunt, stumpy, cut short ; börne stuven, to lop or cut off the head of trees.

As the verb to stow, to thrust or pack tight, is a variety of stab, stop, stamp, so stuf, stuw, above-mentioned, are modifi-cations of stub, stump.

To Straddle.—Stride. Pl.D. striden, strien, Du. strijden, G. streiten, ON. strida, Da. stride, to contend, oppose, struggle with. Pl.D. striden is also to stride ; be-striden, to bestride ; strede, AS. stræde, a stride ; Pl.D. striedschoe, G. schrittschuh, schlittschuh, skates.

There seems so little connection be-tween the two senses of Pl.D. striden, and the interchange of scr and str is so easy (E. scraggle, straggle, scruggle, struggle; It. scrosciare, strosciare, to crack, clatter ; E. scrub, Du. strobbe, shrub), that we are inclined to regard E. stride as a corruption of the form still retained in Somerset, scride, and in Du. schrijden, G. schreiten.

STRADDLE to stride, straddle, deriving it with Dief-enbach from Goth. skreitan, to tear, OSax. scritan, scindere, lacerare; from the notion of separating the legs. This view is strengthened by the double form adduced by Kil., schrijden and scherden, schrijdbeenen, scherdebeenen, to straddle ; schrijdlinck, scherdelinck (G. schrittlings), straddling, astride ; schrede, scherde, a stride, as if from schaerde, a gap, breach, opening. E. share, the fork or division between the legs. But this appearance is probably deceptive, as G. schritt, a step, can hardly be distinct from Sw. skridt, pace, rate of going. Da. skridt, pace, step, from ON. skrida, Sw. skrida. Da. skride, to slide, glide, advance, OHG. skritan, gaskritan, labi, delabi, collabi, significa-tions which appear to belong to a radical image of a totally different nature.

It appears to me that the word straddle (with its derivative stride) is a kindred form with scrabble, scraggle, straggle, struggle, representing, in the first instance, confused noise, then signifying tumultuous movement, throwing about the arms and legs, thrusting in different directions, standing on end, contending with, spread-ing out the legs in the exertion of force. The development of these significations may be traced through Lat. stridere, to hum, whizz, creak, &c., G. strudeln, to move tumultuously like gushing water ; Bav. strodeln, OHG. stredan, to boil ; AS. stredan, to sprinkle, scatter; Bav. stro-deln, also to kick or struggle. The infant strodelt himself out of his swad-dlings ; the child strodelt off the bed-clothes. Da. dial. strutte, to stand on end, stick out, like the staring coat of a horse ; Pl.D. strutt, Da. strid, stiff, rough, hard ; Bav. strut, Pl.D. strudden, struddik, a bush or shrub, a growth con-sisting of stems striking out in all direc-tions. N. strat, a stalk, stump of small trees or bushes, obstinate person ; stratta, stritta, Sw. streta, to resist, oppose ; streta emot strömmen, to swim against the stream. Bav. verstreten, Devonsh. to strat, to stop, hinder. Da. dial. strede, to set the feet apart for the purpose of re-sistance. At strede med benene. Stred, Sw. streta, a shore, support, strut. At staae til stred, to stand leaning against ; stredfast, firm, solid. Pl.D. stridde, a trivet ; Da. stritte, to straddle.

A closely similar series of forms may be traced in which the d of straddle is ex-changed for b, v, or f. OHG. stropalon, crepitare, strepitum edere ; Bav. strabeln, strapeln, to scrabble, struggle, sprawl; ströbeln, strauben, to stand on end; ströbelkopf, a person with tangled staring hair; Du. strobbe, strubbe, a bush, shrub; Bav. straub, Pl.D. struuf, bristling, rough, up-staring; struben, strüven, to stand on end, to set oneself against, to oppose; G. sich strauben, to resist, make head against; Pl.D. streven, to set oneself against, to strive, also to stride, to make wide steps; streef, what resists, strong, stiff; streve, a slanting support, also a stride; to streve staan (as Da. at staae til stred), to support, to thrust in opposite directions with hands and feet. Sik to streve setten, to struggle against. Streveledder, a step-ladder, a ladder with a straddling support.
Fr. escarquiller, to straddle, seems identical with E. scraggle, with inversion of the liquid and vowel, as in Du. schrede, scherde. Lang. esparpalia, to straddle.
To Straggle. To move irregularly, in varying directions, to separate from the regular line of march. From the figure of a broken rattling noise. Bret. straka, strakla, to crackle; strakel, stragel, a clapper of a mill, rattle to frighten birds. A similar relation seems to hold good between Sw. skramla, to rattle, clash, and E. scramble, to get on by broken efforts, to move irregularly, confusedly. See Struggle.
Straight. G., ODu. strack, straight; stracks, stracksweghs, straightways, directly, at once.—Kil. Bav. strack, gestrakt, outstretched, direct, immediate. 'Stracks, recto modo, sine medio; strackait, rectitudo.' — Gl. in Schm. G. strecken, to stretch. See Stretch.
Strain. Breed, race, hereditary disposition, inborn character, turn, tendency, manner of speech or action, style or air of music. In Scotch the word strynd or strain is met. used for the resemblance of the features of the body. As we say, 'he has a strynd or strain of his grandfather,' i.e. resembles him.—Rudd. in Jam.
AS. streonan, strynan, to acquire, get, beget, procreate; strynd, stock, race, generation. E. dial. strene, shoot of a tree; strene, strinde, progeny, child.—Hal.
To Strain. Fr. estraindre, estreindre, from Lat. stringere, to squeeze, wring, strain.
Strait. OFr. estroit, Bret. striz. It. stretto, strait, narrow. Lat. stringere, strictum, to strain.
Stram, WE. stram, a loud sudden noise; to beat, to dash down; strambang, violently; strammer, a great falsehood; strumming, huge, great. Pl.D. stramm, G. straff, tight, stretched. Violence of action is expressed by reference to the noise which accompanies it. See Strapping.
Strand. 1. ON. strönd, border, edge, coast, shore; N. strind, a row, stripe, line; Sw. rand, border, margin, stripe, edge.
2. OHG. streno, G. strähn, stränge, strähe, the strand of a rope, one of the strings of which it is twisted, a skein, tress.
Strange. OFr. estrange, It. strano, Lat. extraneus, from extra, without.
Strangle.—Strangury. Gr. στραγγῶ, Lat. stringo, to strain, squeeze, draw tight; στραγγάλη, a halter; στραγγαλίζω, Lat. strangulo, to strangle.
Again, from the same root, στράγξ, what is squeezed out, a drop; στραγγουρία (οὖρον, urine), suppression of urine.
Strap. Du. strop, a noose, knot, rope, halter; Sw. stropp, tie, fastening, strap; Bav. strupfen, a strap, noose; einstrupfen, to draw together, to shrink. 'Stropfen, strangulare.' — Gl. in Schm. Lat. struppus, a thong, tie. It. stroppo, a withy, osier to bind faggots. Bret. strôba, to tie or join several things together, to envelop, surround; strôb, whatever serves to envelop, surround, or tie together; strôbinel, a whirlwind, whirlpool. Gr. στρόβος, a whirling round, a cord, rope; στρόφος, a twisted band, cord, rope; στροβεύω, στροφέω, to spin, whirl round.
Strapping. Huge, lusty, bouncing.—B. The idea of large size is expressed by the figure of violent action, such as is accompanied by noise. Thus a large object of its kind is called bouncing or thumping, whacking, strapping, the last of which is to be explained by Bret. strap, clash, racket, noise, disorder; strapa, to make a noise. It. strappare, to tear away with violence, to break or snap asunder.—Fl. We speak of a tearing passion, a tearing, slapping, strapping pace.
Stratagem. Gr. στρατηγός, a general, from στρατός, an army, and ἄγω, to lead. Hence στρατηγέω, to act as general, and στρατήγημα, a piece of generalship.
Stratify.—Stratum. Lat. sterno, stratum, to strew, spread over; stratum, what is strewed, a layer, bed.
Straw. AS. streow, streaw, stre, G. stroh, Du. stroo, ON. strá, G. streu, streu-stroh, straw, litter, what is strewed to lie on. Heht he him streowne gegarwian, he ordered to prepare a bed for him. So Lat. stramentum, what is strewed or spread under anything, straw, from ster-nere, stratum, to strew.
Stray. A beast taken wandering from its pasture.—B. Mid.Lat. extrarius, OFr. estrayer, estrajer, a stranger, foreign mer-chant; a stray or beast that has lost its master.—Cot. Estrayere, estrahere, estra-jere, goods left by a stranger dying with-out heirs in a foreign country, which were forfeited to the Lord. 'Si catallum estra-iers inveniatur in teneamento ecclesiæ Cameracencis.' — A.D. 1302. 'Justitia spaviæ, quod Gallicè dicitur estrahere.'—A.D. 1348. The word seems directly formed from Lat. extra without the aid of a second element, and in like manner seems to be formed the verb : OFr. estrder son fief, to abandon his fief; Prov. estra-guar, estracar, to exceed, go out of bounds. Dos estraguat, an extravagant gift; Jor-nada estracada, an excessive day's jour-ney.

Streak. Pl.D. streke. Da. streg, a streak, stroke, stripe, dash, line, trick. See Strike.
Stream. ON. straumr, Du. stroom, G. Strom, Pol. strumien, a stream. Ir. sreamh, a stream, a spring; sreamhaim, to flow. Sanscr. sru, to flow.
Street. Du. straete, G. strasse, It. strada, Lat. strata, via strata, a paved way, then the street of a town.
Stress. Pressure, compulsion. 'I stresse, I strayght one of his liberty, or thrust his body together; je estroysse. The man is stressyd to sore, he can nat styrre him : l'homme est trop estroyssd.'—Palsgr. OFr. estroissir, Fr. étrécir, to straiten, as if from a form strictiare, from strictus, tight, compressed. See Strait.
To Stretch. OHG. strac, strah, rectus, rigidus, strictus; stracchen, to be tight, stiff; stracchian, strecchan, AS. streccan, Du. recken, strecken, to make tight, to stretch; AS. strac, strec, rigid, violent. Strec man, a powerful man. Strece nimath, violenti rapiunt.—Matt. xi. 12. The ultimate origin may be found in Bret. strak, crack, loud noise, the accompani-ment of violent action, whence the term is applied to the state of tension into which a structure is thrown when made the instrument of forcible exertion. See Strain.
To Strew. Goth. straujan, OHG. streu-uan, strouwen, strawen, straian, AS. streo-wian, ON. strá, Lat. sternere, stravi, stra-tum, to strew; stramen, what is strewed, straw. Sanscr. stri, to strew, to spread; AS. stredan, stregan, to sprinkle, scatter. Swab. stritzen, Serv. strtzati, to sprinkle.

Strict, -strict. Lat. stringo, strictum, to tie, or draw tight. District, Restrict. See -strain.
Stride. Pl.D. striden, strien, to con-tend, to stride; bestriden, to bestride; stride, AS. stræde, a stride. It is to be observed that Pl.D. streven is used in the same two senses, to strive and to stride. See Straddle.
Strife.—To Strive. OFr. estrif, strife, contention; estriver, to contend; Bret. strif, striv, quarrel, effort; striva, to quarrel, to strive or endeavour. ON. strida, to contend, fight with, molest; strid, con-test, war; stridr, rough, contrary, stub-born, hard, severe, violent. G. streben, to strive, make efforts, exert force against; strebepfahl, a buttress, shorepost, prop. Pl.D. streven, to exert force, to resist, also to stride.
The radical image seems to be the throwing out the limbs or other means of resistance in the act of opposition, the bristling up of an angry dog or other ani-mal. G. strauben, to stand on end as feathers or hair, to stare up, bristle; sich strauben, to resist, oppose, or make head against, to go against the grain. Es straubet sich, it goes against the grain. Das strauben, standing on end, resisting, opposing. Pl.D. struuf, rough, bristling; sik struven, struben, to bristle up, to set oneself against, to resist, to strut. See Straddle.
To Strike.—Stroke. A loud sharp sound such as that of a hard blow is re-presented by two parallel forms, strac and strap, the first of which is shown in Bret. strak, crack, explosive noise; straka, to crack, to burst; Gael. stràc, a loud or crashing sound, a blow or stroke, and as a verb, strike, beat; E. stroke; G. streich, Du. streke, ON. strik, stryk, a stroke, blow, lash, as well as a streak or line, the course of a blow. Milan. stròcc, blows. We have then the verbs, G. streichen, Du. strijken, to take the course of a stroke, to sweep or move rapidly along a surface, to graze or touch lightly; Pl.D. striken, to sweep, move rapidly over a surface, to iron linen, sharpen a tool, to stroke or flatter; straken, strakeln, G. streichen, streicheln, to stroke. Die Flagge, die segel streichen, to let the sails sweep or slip down, to strike sail.
The radical syllable is applied to the sound of tearing in Gael. srac, tear, rend, rob, spoil; It. stracciare, to tear.
The parallel root strap is seen in Bret. strap, fracas, crash; Lat. strepere, to make a noise; It. strappare, to tear, snap asunder ; E. strapping, thumping, large.
See Strip.
String.—Strong. AS. streng, ON. strengr, G. Strang, Gael, sreang, a string, cord, rope ; It. stringa, a lace, tie ; Du. streng, a strand, twist, hank, skein, traces; G. strick, a noose, snare, cord, traces ; Du. strik, a noose, knot. String seems to be originally conceived as the implement of compression. Gr. σφιγγω, Lat. stringo, strictum, to draw tight, compress, squeeze. To the same root belong AS. Strang, streng, ON. strangr, Du. streng, strong, rough, rigid, severe, tight, strict.
Strip.—Stripe. We have seen under Strike that the parallel roots strak, strap, are used to represent various loud noises such as those of a blow, a rent, &c. In the former of these applications we have Pl.D. stripps, blows ; strippsen, to beat, to flog—Danneil ; Du. strippen, to bastinado; E. stripe, a lash or stroke, and thence the mark of a lash, a streak or long narrow line ; Pl.D. stripe, Du. strepe, strijpe, G. streif, a stripe or line, a strip or long narrow portion. Swiss sträpfeln, to stroke. From the application to the sound of tearing. It. strappare, to break or snap asunder, to pluck or tear away with violence—Fl. ; Swiss strapen, strapfen, Bav. strauffen, strupfen, Du. stroopen, to strip or pull off, especially something that comes off in a continuous line. A strip is a narrow slip such as is stripped off at a blow. A stripling seems to signify stripe-shaped, a tall thin young person, as N. strik, a stripe or streak, also a tall slim youth.
To Strive. See Strife.
Stroke. See Strike.
To Stroll. Swiss strielen, strolen, strolchen, to rove about ; strolchvolk, beggars. Lang, estralia, to wander about. ' Knowing that rest, quiet, and sleep, with lesser meat, will sooner feed any creature than your meat with liberty to run and stroyle about.'—Blith's Husbandry, 1652. Da. dial, strelle, to stroll ; gadestrell, a street-walker. The term seems to be a met. from the flow of water, as we speak of people streaming about, wandering about without definite aim. The sound of milking is represented in Pl.D. by the syllables stripp-strapp-strull (Danneil), whence strull, a thin stream of liquid ; strullen, to stream out as the milk from a cow's udder ; strull-becken, a chamber-pot ; Du. strullen, struylen, streylen, to urine— Kil. ; G. strahl, a ray, a spirt of water; wasserstrahl, a waterspout ; Bav. stralen, strallen, to urine ; stralen, to stroll ; Swab. strollen, a gush of water, struolen, strielen, to stroll.
Structure, -struct. Lat. struo, structum, to build, erect. As in Construct, Destruction, Instruct.
Struggle.—Scruggle. Words of analogous formation and signification with straggle, scraggle, representing in the first instance a broken sound, then applied to broken confused movement. ' I struggell, I murmur with words secretly. He struggleth at everything I do : il grommelle a tout ce que je fays. I scruggel with one to get from him. I scruggel with him: je me estrive a luy. I sprawle with my legs, struggell.'—Palsgr. Scriggle, scruggie, to writhe or struggle.—Forby. Scriggins, scrogglings, the straggling apples left on a tree when the crop has been gathered. Du. struikelen, Pl.D. striikeln, G. straucheln, to stumble.
To Strum. To play badly on a stringed instrument. Properly to thump, to make a noise. G. strampfen, strampeln, to stamp or make a clattering motion with one's feet.—K. Ohg. strom, strum, strepitus. Piedm. strun, resonance, ringing ; struni, perstrepere, reboare, resonare. So Boh. ssumeti, to hum, make a noise; ssumar, a strummer or bad player on the fiddle; ssumariti, to strum. It. strimpellare, to scrape, play badly on an instrument.
Strumpet. OFr. strupre, stupre, Lat. stuprum, concubinage. Ir. striopachas, fornication ; striobuid, a prostitute.
To Strut. I. To project, to swell oneself out, to walk in an ostentatious manner. ' Their bellies standing astrut with stuffing.'—Sir T. More. G. strotzen, to be swollen or puffed out, to strut. Ein gestrotzt volles Euter, an udder distended with milk. Sie strotzt einher, she struts along, she flaunts it. So in vulgar language a swell is one who makes a show in dress. Da. strude, strutte, to stick out; strudbuget, pot-bellied ; strud, extremity, end. Pl.D. strutt. Da. strid, rigid, stiff, sticking out ; Bav. strut, bush, shrub, a growth of stems sticking out in all directions. The sense of sticking out seems to come from the image of kicking, throwing out the limbs, and the word to belong to the class indicated under Straddle.
Strut. 2. In architecture a piece of timber set slanting as a support to a beam. Sw. streta, a support, strut, stanchion; streta, to resist, struggle, strive against; Da. dial. stred, a strut; at strede med benene, stritte imod, to set the legs apart in resistance, to struggle against; stredig, firm, stiff. G. streiten, to contend, struggle with, to oppose or be contrary to. See Straddle.

Stub.—Stump. Two forms differing only in the nasal pronunciation of the latter, both signifying a short projecting end. Du. stobbe, Pl.D. stubbe, stump of a tree; Da. stub, stump, stubble; Gael. stob, stump, stake, prickle, thorn; Du. stompe, Pl.D. stump, stumpel, stummel, a stump, end from which something has been cut off.
The radical image is a sharp abrupt thrust, a conception represented in E. by slightly varying forms, dab, job, stab, and by Gael. stob, push, stab, thrust; Du. stompen, to kick, push, thump; Bav. stupfen, stumpen, to nudge, thrust.
The expression then passes on to signify a body of the form traced out by a movement of the foregoing description, an abrupt projection or object sharply standing forth out of the surrounding surface. In the same way from Bret. stok, jog, shock, we pass to E. stock, the trunk or stem; from Rouchi choquer, to knock, shock, jog, to choque, stump of a tree, block, and the equivalent It. zocco, stump, snag, log, and Fr. souche, stock, trunk; from Da. stode, to jog, strike, push, to stod, a stub or stump of a tree as well as a shock or jolt.
Sometimes an r is introduced without alteration of the sense, as in Sc. stramp, G. strampfen, to trample, compared with E. stamp; Du. strobbe, a shrub or stubby growth, compared with stobbe; G. strumpf, synonymous with stumpf, a stump; and Fr. estrouble, as well as estouble, stubble.

Stubble. Fr. estouble, Prov. estobla, It. stoppia, G. Du. stoppel, the stubs of corn.

Stubborn. For stubberen, like a stub, rigid, obstinate. 'Stubbernesse, contumace; stubbleness, or sturdinesse, lourdasse.'—Palsgr.

Stud. 1. A knob or projecting head of a nail or button, also a bush, shrub, or stumpy growth.
Seest not thilke same hawthorn stud, How bragly it begins to bud.
Shepherd's Cal.
G. staude, a bush, shrub. Der kohl staudet sich, the cabbage grows to a head.
The radical image seems to be a sudden shock or jog, from whence we pass, as in the case of Stub, to the idea of a sharp projection, a short projecting body. Da. stod, a shock, jog, jolt, also a stub or stump of a tree; G. stutzen, to knock, to start; stutz, anything stumpy; stutzohr, an animal with cropped ears; stutzschwanz, a bobtail.
2. A stock of breeding mares. Da. stod, a stud; stodhingst, a stallion, stodhoppe, brood-mare. G. stute, a mare; stuterey, a stud, a collection of breeding horses and mares. Pol. stado, a flock of birds, of sheep, covey of partridges, herd of oxen, stud or collection of breeding horses; stadnik, a stud-horse, stallion, a town bull, herd bull. Lith. stodas, a herd of cattle, especially of horses.
And as he welke in the wodde He sawe a full faire stode Of coltis and of meris gude.
Sir Percival, 325.

Student.—Study. Lat. studeo, to apply one's mind to a thing; studium, study.

To Stuff. To cram, thrust into a receptacle. G. dial. stauchen, stuffen, to thrust, to strike endways (stossen); G. stopfen, Pl.D. stoppen, to stuff, to fill up a cavity, and hence to stop, to prevent access or egress, to bring to a stand. Jemanden das maul stopfen, to stop one's mouth, to silence him. Fr. estouper, to stop, to close; estouffer, to stop the breath, to stifle, choke.—Cot. That this is the true explanation of étouffer is shown by Pl.D. stoff, which signifies not only stuff, but dust, the choking material. Goth. stubjus, G. staub, dust. ON. stybba, thick smoke. 'For when they should draw their breaths this stuffing air and dust came in at their mouths so fast that they had much ado to hold out two days.'—North, Plutarch. 'I stuffe one up, I stoppe his breath. Je suffoque.'—Palsgr.
ON. stappa, to pound, stamp; Gr. στείβω, to stamp, tread; στίφω, Lat. stipo, to cram, stuff, make close, pack together.
Household stuff is the goods with which a house is filled to fit it for occupation, and in a more extended sense, Fr. étoffe, G. stoff, E. stuff, the contents of a thing, that of which it is essentially composed, and specially the woven fabric of which clothes are made.

Stultify. Lat. stultus, foolish.

To Stum.—Stummy. Stummed up, stummy, close, confined. G. stemmen, to stop, to dam. From a modification of the same root with stop, stuff, signifying, in the first instance, thrust or stab, then stick into, bring or come to a stand. G. stupfen, to nudge, to thrust; Du. stom-

STUMpen, to thrust, push, thump; Lith. stumti, to thrust; stumplis, a ramrod; stumtis, to crowd, to press against each other. See To Stem.

Stum. Unfermented wine. Du. stom signifies dumb, and is also explained by P. Marin, du vin muet, wine that has not worked from being oversulphured, and by Holtrop, du vin étouffé, wine that has been choked by sulphur and stopped from working. We have seen in the last article that stum has in E. the sense of stuff or stop up, and Du. stom may be explained from regarding a dumb person as one whose voice is smothered.

To Stumble. To make a false step, to strike the foot against an obstacle in walking. The derivation from stump, as if the word signified to strike against a stump, is supported by many analogies. It. cespo, cespite, a turf, sod, bush; cespitare, to stumble; G. strauch, a shrub, bush; straucheln, to stumble; Du. strobbe, stronck, a stump; strobbelen, stronckelen, to stumble.—Kil. OFr. bronche, a bush, broncher, to stumble; Galla. gufu, a stump, gufada, to stumble. Nevertheless I believe in the present case that the analogy would mislead us, and that the primary meaning is simply to strike with the feet, from the root exhibited in Du. stompen, to kick, thrust, thump, Bav. stumpen, to nudge, strike with the elbow, or the like. Mod. Gr. στουμπίζω, στουμπώνω, to pound, E. stump, to walk with heavy steps, to strike the ground heavily in walking, N. stumpa, to stumble, totter, fall. Da. dial. stumle, stumre, to strike the ground with the feet, to stamp, stumble, totter. At gaae og stumre med en kiep : to stump along with a stick. Pl.D. stumpeln, stunkeln, to hobble; Sc. stummer, to stumble. He slaid and stummerit on the sliddry ground, And fell at end grufelingis amid the fen.—D.V. The resemblance to the word stump arises from the fact that the latter also is derived from the same root, as explained under Stub.

Stump. See Stub.

To Stun. To stupefy with noise or with a blow, primarily with noise. AS. stunian, to resound, to dash; stun, gestun, strepitus.—Ettmüller. G. staunen, erstaunen, to lose the power of action, to be stupefied, astonished. Sc. stonay, to stupefy, astound. The same connection between a loud noise and stupefaction is seen in Lat. attonare, to thunder, and thence to amaze, astonish, deprive of the senses; attonitus, thunderstruck.

-SUADE Stunted. Dwarfed, hindered in growth. ON. stuttr, short; stytta, to cut short; OSw. stutt, stunt, docked, short; stunta, to shorten.—Ihre. G. stutz, a stump, anything short of its kind; stutzen, to dock, to shorten. The fundamental meaning of the word is a short projection, from stutzen, to knock, to strike against, to start.

Stupefy. — Stupid. — Stupor. Lat. stupeo, to stand still like a stock, to be numbed, senseless, astonished. Sanscr. stambh, stop, make or become immovable ; stabhda, stopped, blocked up, stupefied, insensible ; stumbh, stubh, stop, stupefy.

Sturdy. Provincially, giddy, sulky, and obstinate; also a disease in sheep in which the animal becomes sturdy or stupefied.—Craven Gl. Sturdy or stubborn, estourdy.—Palsgr. Gael. stuird, stuirdean, vertigo, a disease in sheep, drunkenness.—Macleod. It. stordire, to make dizzy or giddy in the head.—Fl. Sp. aturdir, to stupefy, confuse. The radical meaning is probably, as in the case of stun, to stupefy with noise, w. twrdd, noise, stir, thunder—Richards ; Da. torden, thunder; Gael. dùrdan, humming noise. It must be merely an accidental resemblance between sturdy and Bret. stard, firm, solid, ON. stirdr, stiff, unbending, hard.

To Stutter. The broken efforts of the voice in imperfect speech and those of the body in imperfect going are commonly represented by the same forms. ' To stut or stagger in speaking or going.'—Baret. ' I stutte, I can nat speake my wordes readily, je besgue.'—Palsgr. G. stossen, to kick, knock, hit; anstoss, a stumbling-block, also stammering or stuttering. Pl.D. stoot, a blow; stottern, G. stottern, to stutter. Swiss dudern, dodern, to stammer; dottern, duttern, to palpitate. See Stammer, Stagger.

Sty. I. N. stigje, stigköyna (E. dial. stianeye, stiony), Pl.D. stieg, a pustule at the corner of the eye. 2. ON. stí, stía. Da. sti, a sty; faarsti, a sheep-cote. Bohem. stág, stáge, a stable, shed, from stogim, státi, to stand. Russ. stoilo, a stall, place for one beast to stand.

Style. Lat. stylus, stilus, a sort of pencil to write with on waxed tablets.

Styptic. Lat. stypticus, from Gr. στυπτικός, astringent, from στέφω, to contract, make close, stiff, thick. See Stiff.

-suade. -suasion. Lat. suadeo, suasum, to advise ; Persuade, Dissuade.

Sub-. Subter-. Lat. sub, subter, under, beneath.
To Subdue. OFr. subduzer, to subdue.—Roquef. The meaning of the word agrees with Lat. subdo, to put under, but according to form it should come from Lat. subduco, OFr. sosduire, to take from under, to withdraw.
Sublime. Lat. sublimis, on high.
Subtile.—Subtle. Lat. subtilis, fine, thin, probably from tela, a web of cloth.
Suburb. Lat. suburbium; from sub and urbs, a city.
Suc-. Lat. sub, before words beginning with c, as in Succeed, Succumb.
Succour. Lat. succurro (sub and curro, to run), to come to the aid of, to come into one's mind; Fr. secourir, to help; secours, succour, assistance.
Succulent. Lat. succus, juice, moist-ure.
Such. Goth. svaleiks (so like), AS. svilk, OHG. solih, sulih, G. solcher, Sw. slik, Westphalian siik.
To Suck. G. saugen, Du. suigen, Lat. sugere, Fr. sucer, It. succhiare, W. sugno, Boh. cucati (tsutsati). From an imitation of the sound.
Sudden. Fr. soubdain, soudain, Prov. sobtan, Lat. subitus, subitaneus, sudden.
Suds. G. sod, the bubbling up of water that simpers or seethes; seifensod, soap-suds.—Kütn. G. sottern, Pl.D. suddern, Du. zudderen, to boil with a suppressed sound; Pl.D. suddeln, G. sudeln, to dabble in the wet, do dirty work. In the same way Swiss schwadern, of liquids in a cask, to dash with a certain noise, to paddle, splash; schwaderete, soapsuds. Banff. sotter, the noise made by anything in boiling or bubbling up; the act of doing work in a dirty, disorderly manner; a state of dirt and disorder. See Seethe.
To Sue.—Suit. From Lat. sequi, to follow, arose It. seguire, Sp. seguir, OFr. sewir, sievir, Wall. suir, to follow, to prosecute or pursue one at law. OE. sewe, sywe. 'Forsake al and sewe me.'—P.P. To sue for an office is to follow after it. From the participle secutus we have Mid.Lat. secta, It. seguito, OE. sywete, Fr. suite, a following, a train of followers, a set of things following in one arrangement. A suit at law, a suit of clothes. 'A thousand knyghtes—clothed in ermyne ech one Of on sywete.'—R. G. To suit is to agree together, as things made on a common plan.
Suet. Lat. sebum, OFr. sieu. 'Miex valt a Dieu obéir que le sieu del multun offrir.'—Livre des Rois. How or when the termination et was added does not appear.
Suf-. Lat. sub, before words beginning with f, as in Suffer, Suffix.
Suffocate. Lat. suffoco, to choak, stop the breath, from sub and faux, faucis, the gullet.
Sugar. Lat. saccharum, Arab. sukkar, Sanscr. sharkara.
Suicide. Lat. sui, of himself, -cida, slayer, from cædo, to kill.
Suit. See Sue.
* Sulky.—To Sulk. AS. asealcan, languescere, flaccescere, torpere; asolcen, remissus, ignavus, deses, iners; solcen, deses, desidiosus.—Lye. Ne læt thu the thin mod asealcan, let not thy mind depress thee.—Cædmon. 130, 30. Bav. selchen, to dry, as hams, sausages, &c.
Sullen. Formerly written soleine, i. e. solitary; of an unsociable morose disposition. So I, quoth he [the cuckoo], may have my make in peace—Let each of hem be soleine all hir live.—Assembly of Foules.
To Sully. It. sogliare, Fr. souiller, to befoul, dirty; se souiller (of a swine), to wallow in the mire. Pl.D. suddeln, sölen, G. sudeln, properly to dabble in wet and dirt, to do dirty work, to dirty. G. sudel, It. soglia, Fr. souil, sueil, the place where a boar wallows in the mire. All ultimately from a representation of the sound made by dabbling in the wet. Swiss südern, to splash, to slobber, eat untidily; süderete, fen, mire, also (con-temptuously) sauce.
Sulphur. Lat. sulphur.
-sult. Lat. salio, saltum, to leap, whence the freq. sultare; as in Insult, Result.
Sultry.—Sweltry. Oppressively hot. Du. zwoel, zoel, G. schwühl, sweltry, swelling, suffocating with heat.—Kütn. AS. swelan, to burn; swaloth, æstus, cauma, oppressive heat; OHG. suelen, suilizon, to burn, to dry up; suilizung, cauma; Pl.D. suelen, to burn without flame, to smoke, and thence (of cut grass) to dry into hay. E. dial. swale, sweat, to wither in the sun, to burn, dry up. 'And men swaliden with greet heete.'—Wiclif. Lith. svilti, svelti, to burn. ON. svæla, thick smoke. Pl.D. verswelen, to burn away, explains another sense of E. sweal, when applied to the guttering of a candle or burning away without producing light; to gutter, melt away, met. to grow thin.—Hal. A similar metaphor is seen in OHG.

suilizon, to parch or dry up; OFlem. swelten, OE. swelt, to faint; MHG. swelten, to be suffocated, to perish through heat or hunger; ON. svelta, Da. sulte, to hunger, famish; Goth. sviltan, AS. sweltan, to die. Nearer the original form is perhaps swelter, to suffer oppressive heat, to faint, or, consequentially, to sweat. Swalterynge or swownynge, syncopa.—Pr. Pm. From this form of the verb we pass to sweltry, sultry.
When we seek for the radical image from whence the expression is ultimately derived, we observe that the characteristic of a smothered flame is the fuel wasting imperceptibly away, an idea which may conveniently be expressed by reference to the spilling or slopping of a liquid, because in the latter case the fact is accompanied by a certain noise which admits of vocal imitation. Now swelk is used to represent the sound of milk dashing in a churn; to swilker, to splash about; to swilker over, to dash over; to swilter, to waste away slowly; swelking, sultry. To swele, swile, to wash or rinse. On the same principle, Pl.D. smuddeln, smullen, to dabble in the wet; of a candle, to gutter or sweal; Du. smoel, sultry; smoel weder, aer languidulus, calor flaccidus.—Kil. E. dial. swatter, to spill or throw about water, to scatter, to waste; swattle, to waste away.

Sum.—Summary.—Summit. Lat. super, above; superior, higher; supremus, summus, highest, topmost, utmost; summum, the top, the whole, the sum.
-sume. -sumption. Lat. sumo, sumptum, to take; as in Consume, Presumption, &c.

Summer. 1. G. sommer, ON. sumar, Gael. samhradh, W. haf. As winter and wind are connected, so we should suspect summer and sun to be, but the connection has not been satisfactorily traced.
2. A beam; bressomer, breast-summer or front beam of a house. Erroneously explained as trabe sommaria, a principal beam.
The true explanation is found in Fr. sommier, a sumpter-horse (and generally any toiling and load-carrying drudge or groom), also the piece of timber called a summer.—Cot. It. somaro, a pack-horse, a summer.—Fl. W. swmer, a beam; swmeru, to support, uphold, prop. See Sumpter.

Summon. Fr. semondre, to invite, warn, summon; semonneur, a summoner. Lat. summoneo; sub and moneo, to warn.

Sumpter-horse. From Gr. σάττω (σάξω), σάγμαζω, to pack close, stamp down, to pack or load, was formed σάγμα, a pack-saddle, a load. We have then Lat. sagma, salma (sagma quæ corrupte salma dicitur—Isid.), It. salma, soma, G. saum, a burden; It. somaro, Fr. sommier, a sumpter or pack-horse. Somaro is now used for a donkey, as Prov. sauma, a she-ass.

Sumptuary.—Sumptuous. Lat. sumptus, expense, costliness, from sumo, sumptum, to take.

Sun. Goth. sunno, ON. sunna, Sanscr. sûnu, syâna, syona.

To Sunder.—Sundry. ON. sundr, asunder, in separate parts; sundra, to tear to pieces, separate; Du. sonder, with-out, separated from; N. sund, i sund, in pieces; sunde klæde, tattered clothes; sundriven, torn to pieces.

To Sup.—Sip. To draw up liquids in small quantities into the mouth with an audible noise, represented by the word itself. Sp. chupar, to suck; Gr. σίφων, a sucker, a pipe for sucking wine out of a cask.

Super—. Lat. super, above, in advance of.

Superb. Lat. superbus, proud.

Supercilious. Lat. cilium, eyelid (cillo, to stir, to twinkle); supercilium, what is above the eyelid, the eyebrow, then, from the contraction of the eyebrows in the expression of such feelings, pride, haughtiness, severity.

Superficies. Lat. superficies; super, and facies, face.

Superfluous. Lat. superfluo, to over-flow.

Superior. See Sum.

Superlative. Lat. superfero, -latum, to lift or bear above; superlatio, excess, amplifying.

Supersede. Lat. supersedeo, to sit upon, and thence by a somewhat obscure figure, to cease from, to give over. To supersede an officer is to cause him to cease from his command.

Superstition. Lat. superstes, remaining; superstitio, a vain fear and worship of supernatural beings. The word is variously and not satisfactorily explained.

Supper. Fr. souper, a meal at which soup formed the principal dish.

Supplant. Lat. planta, the sole of the foot; supplanto, to trip up.

* Supple. Fr. souple, supple, limber, pliant, nimble, flexible.—Cot. Apparently from OFr. soplier, soploier, souploier (sub and plico), to bend, to yield to the will of another.—Burguy. Bret. soubla, to bend down, to incline. Soublid hô penn, bow your head. Gael. subailt, supail (Macalpine), flexible, supple ; sub-laich, to make or become supple.
Suppliant. — Supplicate. Lat. sup-plico, Fr. supplier, to intreat humbly, the knees bending under one.
Supply—Supplement. Lat. suppleo, Fr. suppléer ; sub, and pleo, to fill.
Suppurate. Lat. suppuro, to generate (pus, puris) matter. Gr. πύθω, to rot ; πύον, matter. See Putrid.
Supreme. See Sum.
Sur-. In some cases contr. from Lat. super, upon, above, as in Surprise ; in others, where the verb begins with an r, from Lat. sub, under, as in Surrogate.
Sure. Fr. sûr, OFr. segur, séur, Lat. securus.
Surf. The foaming or broken water made by the waves beating on the shore. Norm. etchurfer, to foam.—Héricher.
Surfeit. I surfet, I eate to muche meate. Je surfays, or, je fays exces. You surfayted yesternight at supper ; vous vous surfistez, or, vous fistez exces hier à souper.—Palsgr. Super, and facio.
Surge. Fr. sourdre (Lat. surgere), to rise, spring, boil or bubble up ; sourgeon, the spouting up of water in a fountain, spring of a well.
It is said that—all great rivers are gorged and assemblede of divers surges and springs of water.—Berneis, Froissart. A surge of tears.—Turber-ville.
Now applied only to the boiling of the waves.
Surgeon. Gr. χειρουργός, one who works with the hand ; Lat. chirurgus, Fr. chi-rurgien, Norm. serugien, OFr. surgien, surgeon.
Surly. The meaning has probably been modified in modern times in accord-ance with a supposed derivation from sour.
Heo schulen hem sulf grennen—and makien sur semblant for the muchele angoise ithe pine of helle.—Ancren Riwle, 212.
The original meaning seems however to have been sir-like, magisterial, arro-gant.
For shepherds, said he, there doen lead, As lords done otherwhere, Their sheep han crusts and they the bread, The chips and they the chear— Sike sirly shepherds han we none. Shepherd's Cal. July.
It. signoreggiare, to have the mastery, to domineer ; signoreggevole, magisterial, haughty, stately, surly.—Altieri. Faire du grobis, to grow proud, to take a surly state upon him.—Cot.
Surmise. OFr. surmise, accusation, from surmettre, to lay upon, to accuse.—Roquef.
Surname. Fr. surnom, an additional name. It. sopranome, a sirname, a nick-name.—Fl.
Surplice. Fr. surplis, OFr. sorpelis, Mid.Lat. superpelliceum, a linen gown worn over the woollen or furry garments of the ecclesiastic.
Surplus. Lat. super, above, contract-ed into sur, and plus, more.
Surprise. Fr. surprise, from surpren-dre, It. sopraprendere, to take unawares, to come upon one suddenly.
Surrender. OFr. surrender, to deliver up. Lat. reddere, to give back.
Surreptitious. Lat. surreptitius ; sur-repo (sub repo), to creep in unawares.
Survey. OFr. surveoir (Lat. videre), to oversee, overlook.
Sus-. Lat. sub, in comp. with words beginning with c, p, s, t ; as in Susceptible, Suspend, Sustain, &c.
Sutler. G. sudeln, to dabble in the wet, to do dirty work, to handle a thing in a slovenly manner ; sudler, a dabbler, dauber in painting, a scullion ; Du. soete-len, to do dirty work, to carry on a petty trade, to huckster ; soetelaar, a camp huckster or sutler. See Suds.
Suture. Lat. sutura, a seam sewed, from suo, sutum, to stitch or sew.
Swab.—Swabber. Du. zwabber, Sw. swabb, a swab or kind of mop made of unravelled rope, used on board ship for mopping the decks. The radical mean-ing of the word is to sop or slop, to splash in water. Du. zwabberen, to swab, dabble, paddle ; G. schwabbeln, schwap-pern, schweppen, schweppen, to splash, dash to and fro, wabble. ' Dann schwappte die woge bis zu den schultern :' the wave splashed up to the shoulders.—Sanders. N. svabba, sabba, subba, to spill or splash water, to dabble in wet ; E. dial. swab, to splash over. In like manner Fr. gadrouille, a swab, from Swiss Rom. gadrouilli, to dabble, to disturb water.
Swad.—Swaddle. Swad, a peascod, a handful of peasestraw.—Hal. A swad of a woman, obesula.—Coles. Swat, to throw down forcibly, a quantity ; swatch, a piece of anything, a patch, a sample. The fundamental meaning of swad, swat, swath, like that of squad, squab, would seem to be a lump or bundle of some-thing soft, from Du. swadderen (Kil), Bav. schwadern, schwatteln, E. dial.

swatter, swattle, to splash, dash, or spill liquids. Swiss schwetti, so much of a fluid or soft matter as is thrown down at once, then a lot or quantity of things, as of apples. The swath of grass would then be the bundle of grass cut at each stroke of the scythe, and the verb to swathe, to make a bundle of, to tie up in bundles. 'Swathed or made into sheaves.'—Cot. in v. javelé. It is certainly in this sense that swatch seems to be used by Tusser: One spreadeth those bands, so in order to lie, As barley, in swatches, may fill it thereby.
To swatch, to bind, as to swaddle, &c.—Hal. The forms swatch and swatchel, a fat slattern, also to daggle, dirty, to beat, unite swad, swath, swathe, swaddle, with Du. swachtel, swadel, a swathe or swaddling-band; zwachtelen, to swathe, to swaddle. In the application of swatchel to a fat woman, the reference is to the swagging or wabbling movement of the flesh of a fat person, as in Bav. schwadig, schwattig, swagging, soft, as boggy ground, and the softer parts of the body; e schwadige menschin, a full-breasted woman. To swaddle was also to beat. Swaddled, cudgelled.—Coles. He banged, belammed, thumped, swaddled her.—Cot. in v. chaperon. And this is in accordance with other cases in which words expressing the dashing of liquids are used to signify beating, as to wallop, or G. schwappen, to splash, compared with E. swap, a blow; Banff soople, to wash, to soak, to beat with severity; Fr. esclabousser, to splash, Lang. esclabissa, assommer de coups. Perhaps we must regard swatchel and swatch as immediately derived from forms in which the d of swaddle or labial of swap, swabble, is replaced by a guttural. E. dial. swack, to strike, to throw; swack, a large quantity (Jam.), a blow, a fall; swacking, huge, large.—Hal.

To Swag.—Swagger. The idea of tremulous motion, swaying backwards and forwards, is commonly expressed by forms originally representing the sound made by the dashing of water, swabble, swaddle, swaggle, wabble, waddle, waggle; where the final consonant may be of any class, labial, dental, or guttural, and the initial s may be omitted without altering the force of the word. Thus we have Swiss schwabbeln, schwabben, to splash, dash to and fro, wabble, swag like loose flesh, stagger like a drunken man. With a final g, E. dial. swiggle, to shake liquor violently, to rinse linen to and fro in water. I swagge, as a fatte person's belly swaggeth as he goth.—Palsgr. Swaggergog, a quaking bog.—Mrs Baker. To swagger in gait is to walk in an affected manner, swaying from one side to the other. Swiss schwäglen, to stroll about. To swagger in talk may be directly taken from the noise made by the dashing of liquids, as in the case of Bav. schwadern, to splash, tattle, bluster, swagger. The nasalisation of the consonant gives G. schwanken, to splash to and fro, to waver, rock, stagger; E. dial. swanky, watery beer, boggy, swaggering, strutting.

Swain. Da. svend, a bachelor, servant, attendant, journeyman; svendedreng, a male child; ON. sveinn, a boy, young man, servant. The word has clearly nothing to do with swine.

Swale. NE. windy, bleak, cold. ON. svala, to cool, to refresh; svali, coolness, cold, heat.
To Swale.—Sweal. See Sultry.

Swallow. ON. svala, G. schwalbe, Du. zwaluw, Pl.D. schwalbe, OberD. schwalm.
To Swallow. G. schwelgen, to swill, guzzle, tipple. ON. svelgia, to swallow. Du. swelgen, to devour, swallow, drink. From the sound made in swallowing liquid. Bav. schwappeln, to splash, to swag (of loose flesh), to swill, to be addicted to drink. N. skvala, to gurgle.

Swamp.—To Swamp. To swamp a boat is to sink it by the washing in of the waves. ON. squampa, to splash; Swiss schwampeln, to splash, dash to and fro like water. N. skumpla, to shake to and fro in a vessel. It is the nasalised form of Bav. schwappeln, E. dial. swab, squab, to splash, dash over. From the same source is E. swamp, a soft plashy ground; Pl.D. swamp, swamm, G. schwamm, a sponge, a structure adapted to sop up water; or a fungus, a soft spongy growth.

Swan. ON. svanr, G. schwan.

Swap. I. Swap and swack represent the sound of a blow, and thence are applied to any sudden movement, as in falling, striking, throwing. Pl.D. swaps! swips! swups! express the sound of a smack, and thence signify quick, immediate. Swaps! kreeg he enen an de Oren: smack! he caught it on the ears. Schwipp! schwapp! schlug er mir den Kopf ab: smack! he cut off my head. Swap! quickly, smartly. In some counties a fall is called a swap.—Hal. W. chwap, a sudden stroke or blow, and as an adverb, instantly. To swap, to draw a sword, to cast a stone, to strike.—Jam. Hence swapping (like strapping, whapping, bouncing, thumping), large, huge, strong.—Hal. In like manner from the representation of the sound of a blow by the syllable swack; swacking, unusually large.—Mrs B. ' He swacked the wood in his face.' Schwapp! lässt sie ihr Schlüssel-band nach seinem kopfe fliegen : slap! she let fly her keys at his head.—Sanders.
2. The sense of barter or truck seems to come from the notion of a sudden turn, an exchange of place in the objects that are swapped. In the same way to chop is to do anything suddenly, to turn suddenly round, and to swap or barter. The wind chops round to the north, a greyhound chops up a hare. G. stutzen or stossen, to knock or strike; waaren verstutzen, ver-stossen or umstossen, to chop, swap, bar-ter.—Küttn.
Sward. ON. svörðr, Du. swaerde, G. schwarte, Pl.D. swaarde, sware, the thick skin of bacon or pork, then applied to the skin of the head, the coating of turf on a grass-field. Du. swaerde van den hoofde, the skin of the head; Pl.D. grönsward, greensward. The proper meaning of the word would seem to be the crackling or skin of roast pork. Bohem. sskwariti, Illyr. chwariti, to crackle like melting fat, to fry; sskwar, skin of pork; sskwarek, Illyr. chwarak, greaves, remnants after the melting of tallow. OHG. swarte, cremium [quod re-manet in patella de carnibus frixis]—Schm.
Swarm. A multitude of creatures in intricate movement. The idea of multi-tudinous movement is expressed by the representation of a confused sound, as in scrawl, crawl, and Fr. grouiller, to rumble, also to swarm, abound, break out in great numbers. Zulu bubula, to hum, as bees; bubulela, a swarm of bees, concourse of people. On the same principle the origin of swarm is the representation of a hum-ming or buzzing sound. E. dial. sharm, a confused noise, buzzing, din.—Moor. G. schwarm, noisy revelry; schwärmen, to buzz, to make a confused sound as a mul-titude in motion, to swarm as bees, to revel. 'Was für ein liebliches Sumsen schwärmt um mich her.' Bav. schwurm, geschwürm, confusion in the head, swarm, throng; schwirbeln, schwarbeln, to move in a confused mass, to whirl, to swarm.
To Swarm.—Squirm.—Swarf. To climb the bole of a tree by clipping it with the arms and legs, twisting them around it. He swarfed then the mainmast tree, He swarfed it with might and main. Ballad of Sir Andrew Barton, N. & Q., Ju. 59. Then up the mainmast swerved he. Ibid., Percy Soc. To squirm, to wriggle about, to climb trees by embracing them with the arms and legs.—Webster. OFris. swerva, to crawl. 'Alle da creatura deer op der eerde swerft.'—Richthofen. MHG. swirben, to whirl, to move in a confused mass. Sw. swarfwa, to turn; Du. swermen, swerven, to wander about (Kil), to rove, wander, revel.—Bomhoff. The radical image is a mass in intricate confused movement. See Swarm.
Swart.—Swarthy. Goth. svarts, ON. svartr, G. schwarz, black; ON. surtr, swarthy. Diefenbach connects Lat. sordes, dirt, as if swarthy were dirt-coloured.
Swash. Swish and swash represent the sound made by the collision of liquids or of divided solids. A horse swishes his tail; swish-swash, washy liquor. Piedm. svassé, to splash, to rinse. To swash down, to fall with a noise. In the same way soss, a heavy fall, a dirty mess. Sossle, to make a slop.—Hal. To swash, also figuratively to swagger, to talk big. Sw. swassa, to strut, to swagger, to talk bombast.
Swath. G. schwaden, Du. swade, Pl.D. swad, swatt, the row of grass as it lies on the left of the mower cut by his scythe, also the bare space from which it is cut. Commonly explained from AS. swathe, a track, path, footsteps. Nænige swathe his owhwær ætywde : no traces of him anywhere appeared. On swathe, in the way. Dolhswathe, the traces of a wound, a cicatrice. Thus the swath is understood as primarily signifying the path cut by the mower in the standing grass. But the heap of grass seems to have a stronger claim to attention than the space from which it is cut, and the original meaning of the word is probably the mass of grass cut by a single blow of the scythe. Fr. javeler, to swathe or gavel corn, to make it into sheaves or gavels.—Cot. E. dial. swaff, as much grass as a scythe cuts at one stroke.—Hal. See Swad.
Sway. Du. zwaayen, to swing, turn, brandish; Pl.D. swajen, to waver in the wind; ON. sveigja, N. svogja, svöia. Da. sveie, to bend; N. svaga. Da. svaie, to swing to and fro, to roll like a ship; svaierum, room for a ship to swing at anchor. Sw. swegryggad, swankruggad, swayed in the back; E. swaying, a hollow raking of the backbone.—B. For the ultimate origin see Swag.
To Sweal. To sweat a hog, to singe him; to sweal, to melt wastefully away like bad candles.—B. See Sultry.
To Swear. Goth. svaran, ON. sverja, G. schwören, to swear; ON. svara, to answer.
The radical meaning seems to be to certify, to assure, to declare as true, from OHG. wâr, G. wahr, certain, assured, true. Ze tôd wâr, as sure as death. ' Ez ist mir wârez gewizzen:' it is known to me for certain. Wâr machen, to make sure, to prove by documents.—Schmeller. Pl.D. waren, to certify, to prove by witnesses or documents. Waren up den hilligen, to take his corporal oath, to swear by the holy relicks.—Brem. Wtb. See Ware.
Sweat. ON. sveiti, AS. swat, sweat, also blood. w. chwys, Sanscr. svaidas, Lat. sudor, sweat; udor, moisture; udus, wet.
To Sweep. ON. sópa, to sweep, to wipe; sópr, a besom; Sw. sopa, to sweep, wipe, brush; also a clout, a duster; Gael. sguab, sweep; sguab, sguaib, w. ysgub, a besom, brush, a sheaf of corn; ysgubo, to sweep, to whisk; Bret. skuba, to sweep; Lat. scopæ, Sp. escoba, a besom.
The radical image seems to be the rinsing of a vessel with water, the dashing of water over a surface, or the coursing of the waves along the surface of water. G. schwappen, schweppen, to splash or slop. ' Die schwappenden fluthmassen.' ' Der wein im gläse schweppet über.' Schweifen, to move a fluid body to and fro, to rinse, to splash, to sweep along the ground, to rove or range over the country; Du. sweyven, to vacillate, fluctuate, wander.
Sweet. AS. swet, Du. zoet, ON. sætr, G. süss, Sanscr. svad, Lat. suavis.
To Swell. ON. svella, to swell; sollin skip, a sodden, water-logged ship. The original sense is probably shown in Du. swellen (Kil.), a parallel form with wellen, to boil, to spring, G. wallen, to boil, wallop, move along in a waving manner. Das meer wallet, the sea swells up in waves; eine hohe welle, a great swelling wave.—Kütn. The same relation is seen in ON. bolginn, Da. bullen, swollen, and Lat. bullire, to boil, Du. bolghe, a wave or billow.
To Swelter. The sense of this word in the ordinary expression of sweltering with heat seems to be to faint with heat.
Swalterynge or swownynge, syncopa.—Pr. Pm. Probably swatter, swalter or swelter, swilker, are parallel forms, representing, in the first instance, the noise of dashing liquids, then signifying the dashing or splashing of liquids, spilling, squandering, wasting; then wasting away, fainting. To swatter, to spill or throw about water as geese or ducks do in drinking, to scatter, to waste; to swather, to faint; to swattle, to drink as ducks do water, to waste away.—Hal. The insertion of an l (as in palter compared with patter, E. dial. swalch for swatch, a patch, stramalkin for stramaking, Sc. fagald for fagot) gives swalter, swelter, to flounder in the wet, to drip, trickle.
Slippes in the sloppes oslante to the girdylle, Swatters up swiftly with his swerde drawene. Morte Arthure.
I feel the drops of sweltering sweat Which trickle down my face.—Gascoigne.
To swilter, to waste away slowly.—Hal.
We must however not regard these parallel forms as actually derived from each other, but rather as arising from slightly varying efforts to represent the same inarticulate sounds. With a final k instead of l in the radical syllable we have swelk, noise made by liquid in a churn; to swilker, to splash; swelking, sultry. See Sultry.
To Swerve. To wander from.—B. Du. swerven, swermen, to wander, rove, also to riot, revel.
The radical image is a hum or confused noise, from which we pass to the notion of noisy revelry, on the one hand, and, on the other, to that of whirling, turning round, turning aside, moving to and fro. Sw. hurra, surra, swirra, to whizz, buzz, whirl; surra, swirra, also to revel; ON. hverfa, to turn, bend; Da. surre, to hum, buzz, also as N. svarva, to lash or twist a rope round with string; Da. svire, to revel; to whirl, turn round; Da. dial. svirre, to move to and fro; slæden svirrer, the sledge swerves, swings to one side; svarre, svarbe, to turn in a lathe.
Swift. The idea of rapidity or momentary duration is commonly expressed by the figure of a smart blow. Thus in Scotch they say, I'll be with you in a rap, in a clap; while swak, which originally represents the sound of a blow, is used for a little while.
He had slummerit bot an swak.—D. V.
Swap, which like swack represents the sound of a blow, is used for any rapid action, for the drawing of a sword, casting of a stone, or the like. The change of the vowel from a to i expresses a finer, smaller motion, as in whip, to strike with something thin, to do anything quickly, compared with whap, to strike a heavy blow. On this principle we pass from swap to ON. svipa, to whip, to move quickly, do anything hastily, to brandish a sword ; svipull, moveable, transitory ; svipr, svif, a sudden movement, a moment, instant ; i övi svifi, at the same moment ; Da. i et svip, in a trice ; ON. svifa, to move to and fro ; to move suddenly ; svifr, moveable, yielding. Sc. swipper, quick, nimble, sudden ; swiff, rotatory motion, or the sound produced by it ; the swiff of a mill.—Jam. AS. swipa, a whip ; swipian, to whip or do something with a momentary action. Swipte hire thæt heafod : he whipped off her head. See Swivel.

To Swig. To drink in sounding gulps. Swig or swidge, water or beer spilt on the floor, table, &c. If the roof or a barrel leaks, the floor will be ' all of a swidge.' Swidge, a puddle ; to swiggle, to shake liquor in an inclosed vessel—Forby ; to rinse linen in water.—Moor.

To Swill. To rinse, to wash out with water ; swill-tub, the tub which holds the hog-wash—Mrs. Baker ; swill-bowl, a drunkard ; swiller, a scullion, one who washes the dishes ; AS. swilian, to wash ; swiling, a gargle. Doubtless from the sound of agitated liquid, and perhaps contracted from a form like swiggle, to shake liquor violently, to rinse in water, to drink greedily. To swilker, to splash, is a parallel form. Da. skylle, to rinse, wash ; skyllevand, dishwash, swillings ; skyllebad, a shower-bath. See Scullery. G. spülen, to wash, rinse, swill.

To Swim. This word seems originally to apply to the movement of water in agitation ; to move or flow like water ; to be carried along on the surface of water, to move about on the surface or in the water. N. svabba, to dabble, paddle, splash, spill ; Swiss schwabbeln, to wabble, splash, fluctuate, to reel like a drunken man ; schwabbelig, overflowing, reeling ; est ist mir so schwabbelig. Bav. schwaiben, to overflow, to rinse, to wash. Die Wäsche schwaiben, to swiggle or rinse linen in water ; Gläser schwaiben, to rinse glasses ; das geschwaibet (geschwemme, gespüle), dishwash, swillings. Schwaiben, or schweben are then used in the sense of moving to and fro like water, being carried on the surface of water, reeling, staggering. Auff'm wasser schweben, fluctuare, jactari fluctibus ; das Schiff das da schwebet in dem Meer, the ship floats in the sea. Suebont, natant ; suepen, sueparon, nare.—Gl. in Schm. G. schweben, to float, wave, hover, flutter.—Küttn. The softening of the final b to m leads from Swiss schwabbeln to ON. svamla, to splash, paddle in water, and from G. schweben to Bav. schwaimen. Der Vogel schwaimet in den Lüften, the bird hovers in the air. Hin und wider schwaimen, to wander to and fro. G. schwemmen, to wash, to bathe in water ; schwimmen, to swim, to be borne along by or to be bathed in liquid. ON. sveima, to move to and fro in a confused manner, to wander about, to swarm ; svima, svimma, to swim ; svimra. Da. svimle, to be dizzy, giddy. The Kestrel or Windhover is called in G. schweimer, schwemmer, schwimmer, schweberle, from its 'schwebenden' flight. The head swims when the visible scene appears in unsteady movement around us like the surface of water.

Swindle. G. Schwindel, swimming in the head, dizziness, giddiness. In a figurative sense Schwindel is applied to dealings in which the parties seem to have lost their head, as we say, to have become dizzy over unfounded or unreasonable prospects of gain. ' Als der Assignaten-Schwindel (Assignat-mania) zu wüthen begann.' ' Er hat bei dem Aktien-Schwindel (Share-mania) viel Geld verdient.'—Genz in Sanders. The word may be translated madness, delusion. Then in a factitive sense Schwindeler, one who induces delusions in others. Einem etwas abschwindeln, to get something from another by inducing delusion ; to swindle him out of something. The parallel form ON. sundla, to be dizzy, connects G. schwindeln through ON. sund, a swimming, with svima, svimma, to swim, svimra. Da. svimle, to be dizzy. Du. swijmelen, falsa imaginari instar dormientium, vertigine laborari.—Kil. Da. svingel, dizziness, darnel (from producing dizziness) ; svingle, to reel as a drunken man.

Swine. Goth. svein, ON. svin, Russ. svinya, Pol. swinia, swine. Apparently a derivative from the original form corresponding to E. sow.

Swing. G. schwingen, N. svinga, to swing, whirl, brandish. The idea of an undulating or to and fro movement is widely expressed by forms that may be grouped round a root wag. E. waggle, wag; G. wackeln, to wag, waddle, wabble; Du. wigghelen, to shake, to totter, also as G. wickeln, to roll in, to wrap.—Kil. Lat. vagari, to wander; vacillare, to waver, totter; Fr. vague, a wave; and with a nasal, Du. wankelen, G. wanken, to wag, wabble, reel; AS. wancol. Da. wankel, wavering, unsteady; ON. vingsa, to swing, to dangle; E. wing, from its rapid vibrations in flight.

Then with a sibilant prefix, Sc. swag, to swing, move backwards and forwards, and with the nasal, G. schwanken, Du. swancken, swanckelen, to waver, stagger, totter; G. schwänken (as E. swiggle), to rinse in water; ein fass schwänken, to swing a cask with some water in it in order to wash it thoroughly.—Küttn. AS. swangettan, to wag, waver, palpitate. Fris. swinge, a wing.

To Swinge. To beat or strike, an act that is done with a swinging movement. AS. swingan, to do anything with violent action, to scourge; sweng, a blow; Fris. swinge, a flail.—Japycx.

To Swink. To labour. From a swinging, whirling movement, taken as a type of violent exertion. Du. swancken, librare, vibrare, quatere; swanck, swinck, vibratio, libratio, motus, momentum.—Kil. Pl.D. swunken, to sway to and fro as a tree under the impulse of a violent wind.—Danneil.

Swipe. The crane-like contrivance for drawing water, consisting of a rod unevenly balanced on a post, having a weight at the short end and bucket at the long end; in Du. wippe, wipgalge, from wippen, to vibrate; or swankroede, from swanken, to vibrate, as E. swipe from ON. svipa, to brandish, to move rapidly to and fro. Pl.D. swengel, a swipe, from swinging to and fro.—Danneil. NE. swape, the handle of a pump.

Swipes. To swipe, to drink off hastily.—Hal. N. skvip, thin and tasteless drink. G. schwappen, schweppen, to splash, dash; dünnes geschweppe, thin watery beer. Da. dial, at svipe ollet, to water the beer; svip, swipes, thin beer.

Switch. A pliant rod, from the swishing noise which it makes in moving rapidly through the air when a blow is struck with it. Pl.D. zwuksen, to make such a noise, also to bend to and fro; zwukse, Hanover swutsche, a long, thin rod, a switch. G. zwitschern, to chirp or twitter as birds.

Swivel. A fastening so contrived as to allow the thing fastened to turn freely round on its axis. ON. svif, sudden movement; N. sviv, swing, force of movement; sviva, to turn round; sveiva, the crank or handle of a wheel; ON. sveifla, to swing round, to brandish. See Swift.

Swoon.—Swound. A swoon is a failure of the active principle. AS. swindan, to consume, languish, vanish. OHG. swindan, swintan, tabescere; suuintit, tabescit (anima tua); farsuindan, evanere, deficere, absorbere, transire.

The idea of wasting or consuming is often expressed by the figure of spilling liquids, as in squander, which is a nasalised form of squatter, to splash, dabble. In the same way G. verschwenden, to squander, dissipate, waste, must be regarded as a nasalised form of the equivalent E. swatter, Bav. schwaddem, schwiddern, to splash or spill. The final d is lost in schwainen, to spill, consume.
'Alles des pluts das ymmer verswaint und vergossen wirt:' 'of all the blood that is ever shed and poured out. 'Blutverswainer Christus:' 'Christ prodigal of his blood. — Schmeller. Swab. schwanen, schweinen, schwenden, to waste away, shrink, wither; Bav. schwand, schwund, decrease, waste. Es geschwindet mir, hat mir geschwinden: I have lost my strength. G. schwindsucht, the wasting sickness, consumption; Swiss schwinden, geschwinden, to swoon or faint.

Swoop. A sweeping movement.

Sword. AS. sweord, ON. sverd, G. schwert.

Sycophant. Gr. συκοφάντης, a common informer, false accuser, slanderer, false adviser. The name would literally signify an informer about figs, from σῦκον, a fig, and φαίνω, to shew, but there is no really historic knowledge how it arose.

Syl-. Sym-. Syn-. Sy-. The Gr. prep. σύν, with, answering to Lat. cum, con-, appears in composition under the foregoing forms, the final ν being assimilated to a following liquid, and lost before a σ or ζ.

Syllable. Gr. λαμβάνω, ἔλαβον, to take; συλλαβή, a taking together, several letters taken together, a syllable.

Syllogism. Gr. συλλογισμός; λογισμός, an argument, reason.

Sylph. A spirit of the air, a name said to be invented by Paracelsus.

Symbol. Gr. βάλλω, to cast; συμβάλλω, to put together, to compare; σύμβολον, a mark or token of a thing, a ticket, cheque, a verbal signal or watchword, hence the creed or watchword of the Christian body.
Symmetry. Gr. σύμμετρος, commensurate with, in due proportion, fitting; μέτρον, a measure.
Sympathy. Gr. συμπάθεια, feeling with another. See Pathetic.
Symphony. Gr. συμφωνία; σύν, and φωνή, a voice, uttered sound.
Symptom. Gr. σύμπτωμα, a coincidence, concurrent event; from συμπίπτω, to fall out together.
Synagogue. Gr. συναγωγή, an assembly; συνάγω, to bring together, collect.
Syncopy. Gr. συγκοπή, a cutting short; σύν, and κόπτω, to cut.
Syndic. Gr. δίκη, right, law, lawsuit; σύνδικος, a helper in a court of law.
Synod. Gr. ὁδός, a way; σύνοδος, a coming together.
Synonym. Gr. ὄνομα, name, συνώνυμος, having the same name.

Synopsis.—Synoptical. Gr. ὄψις, a viewing, sight; σύνοψις, a comprehensive glance. See Optic.
Syntax. Gr. τάσσω, τάξω, to arrange; τάξις, an arranging, order, rank; σύνταξις, an arranging together, putting together in order.
Synthesis. Gr. σύνθεσις, from συντίθημι, to put together.
Syringe. Gr. συρίζω, to pipe or whistle; σύριγξ, a pipe.
Syrup. It. siroppo, Sp. xarope, xarabe, axarabe, from Arab charáb, a frequent word among the Arab doctors. Becri says the charáb of honey is called hydromel. From chariba, to drink.—Engelberg. Sharb, shurb, drinking. See Sherbet.
System. Gr. σύστημα, what stands together, a body of united elements; συνίστημι, to put or be put together, to consist.

Tabard. It. tabarro, Fr. tabarre, Sp. tabardo, a wide loose overcoat, the painted overcoat worn by heralds.
Tabby. Sp. tabi. It. tabino, tabi, Fr. tabis, Arab. attábi, a rich kind of watered silk. From a quarter of Bagdad called al-'Attábiya, where figured stuffs of that kind were manufactured.—Dozy.
2. A brindled cat, marked with stripes like the waves of watered silk.
Tabernacle. Lat. tabernaculum, dim. of taberna, a booth.
Table.—Tabular. Lat. tabula, a board, a table.
Tabor.—Tambour.—Tambourine.—Timbrel. Prov. tabor, Fr. tambour, Sp. tambor, atambor, a drum; tamborete, tamboril, a little drum, a tabour or timbrel. Arab. tabl, a drum, Sp. atabal, timbal, kettledrum. The sound of a blow is very generally represented by the syllables tab, tap, dab, dob, top, or the like. Thus the Spaniards represent the beating of the drum by tapatan or taparapatan, as we by rubadub or dubadub. Arab. tabtabat represents the sound made by the dashing of a waterfall. Malay tabah, tabuh, to beat, to drum; tabuk, tapuk, to slap. Gr. τύπτω, to beat. Magyar dobogni, to knock, to stamp; dob, a drum. Fr. tabouler, to knock loud and fast; Piedm. tabussé, to knock at a door, to beat; tabuss, noise, uproar. Fr. tapper, to strike, clap; E. tap, to knock gently; E. dial. tabber, to knock or tap. 'How that boy is tabbering on the table.'—Mrs Baker. Devon, to taper at the door.—Lye. It. toppa! toppa! represents the sound of knocking at a door. Swiss doppeln, to knock at a door, to hammer. Champagne tombir, to resound; tombe, a hammer. It. tambussare, tambustare, to rumble, rattle, drum, to dubadub.—Fl.
Tacit. Lat. tacitus; taceo, to be silent. Goth. thahan, ON. thegja, Sw. tiga, Da. tie, OHG. thagen, thaken, dagen, to be silent.
\*Tack. I. To tack, to fasten, to sew slightly together, whence tack, a small nail for fastening on something to a more important object. Piedm. taché, Milan taccá, It. attaccare, to fasten; staccare, to unfasten, to detach; attaccaticcio, sticky. Bret. tach, Langued. tacho, a tack or small nail.
Tack is, I believe, an analogous form to jog, jag, dag, dig, stag, stack, stick, representing in the first instance a sharp movement abruptly checked, then signifying thrust, projection, point. The passage to the sense of fastening is seen in the expressions to stick out, to stick in, to stick to.
G. zack! is used as an interj. expressing movement with a sudden start.—Sanders. Er säumte nicht den Rappen anzustechen, und zack! zack! war er zum Thor hinaus. The repetition of the significant element in zickzack represents a succession of abrupt movements in different directions, indicated by the change of vowel from a to i, and thus signifies a jagged or zigzag line.
Hence zacke, zacken, a jag, spike, prong, tooth; zacken, to jag, notch, indent, explaining It. tacca, a notch. Pl.D. takk, a point, tooth, branch of a tree.
The sense of thrusting is seen in Piedm. taca, a support, a stand for a barrel; Gael. taic, prop, support; Sp. taco, stopper, plug, ramrod, billiard-cue. Sometimes the word may come direct from the figure of something clapped on. Sp. taque, the clapping of a door; Fr. taquer, toquer, to beat, to knock.—Jaubert. It. tach-tach, the sound of beating, hammering, &c.; tacco, taccone, a patch, a heel-tap; toppa, a tack cobbled on an old shoe.—Fl.
2. In nautical language a tack is the rope which draws forward the lower corner of a square sail, and fastens it to the windward side of the ship in sailing transversely to the wind, the ship being on the starboard or larboard tack according as it presents its right or left side to the wind. The ship is said to tack when it turns towards the wind, and changes the tack on which it is sailing.
Tackle. The harness of a draught horse, or ropes and furniture of a ship. Du., Pl.D. takel, the fittings of a ship, W. taclau, accoutrements, implements; taclau y llong, the tackle of a vessel; taclu, to dress, deck, fit, furnish; taclus, trim, adorned. Perhaps the word may be explained from It. dial. tacar or tacar sotto (Cherubini), It. attaccare, to harness horses and fasten them to the carriage.
Tact-, -tact.—Tangent, -tingent. Lat. tango, tactum (in comp. -tingo, -tactum), to touch; tactus, the sense of touch, a touch; contingo, to touch one another, to arrive, to happen; contiguus, touching each other, near to. E. tangent, a touching line.
Tactics. Gr. τακτική, matters pertinent to military movements, from τάσσω, τάξις, to array.
Tadpole. The young of the frog in its first stage after leaving the egg, a creature consisting apparently of a globular head with a tail. Hence it is frequently designated by the same name with the miller's thumb, a small fish of similar conformation. Fr. chabot [Lat. capito, big-head], the little fish called a bull-head or miller's thumb; also the little water vermin called a bullhead.—Cot. Another name for both is têtard (Trev.), while the tadpole is distinguished as têtard de grenouille, G. Kaulhaupt, Kaul-haupt (Diefenb.), Kaulkopf (Sanders), Kullkopf, tadpole, bull-head (Idioticon v. Kurhessen), from Kulle. Boh. kule, kaule, a bowl or ball. W. penbwl, a blockhead, a tadpole, from pen, head, and pwl, obtuse, blunt, properly round, globular. Gael. pollceannach, lump-headed, stupid; poll-ceannan, a tadpole. To these latter forms correspond E. dial. polehead, Sc. powhead, a tadpole, from poll, a rounded top, a head; a mere variation of bullhead. The creature is also called pollwiggle, pollywig, from AS. wigga, Esthon. waggel, a worm (s. Earwig); the round-headed worm.
The form tadpole is equivalent to Fr. têtard de grenouille, or to G. Kaulpadde, Kaulfrosch, Pl.D. Kälpogg, Pälpogg (Danneil), the element tad, being the AS. tade, a toad, corresponding to Pl.D. padde, pogg, a frog, while the final pole is identical with the W. pwl, Gael. poll, with the bull in bullhead, and with poll, a round top.
Tag. Point of a lace.—B. Sw. tagg, Pl.D. takke, G. zacken, a point, tooth, thorn; zacken, to jag, dent, notch. Formed on the same principle as dag, jag, jog, representing in the first instance a sharp movement abruptly checked, then the path traced out by such a movement, a pointed shape. See Zigzag, Tack.
Tail. W. tagell, a dewlap, wattle. G. dial. zagel, Zâl, a tassel.—Deutsch. Mundart. Zagel is also the tuft of hair on a beast's tail, the tail itself; zageln, to wag the tail. ON. tagl, a horse-tail. Sw. tagel, horse-hair.
The radical idea would seem to be what dangles to and fro.
-tail.—Entail.—Retail. From Fr. tailler, to cut, an estate-tail is a partial estate cut out of the fee-simple, so as to leave a remainder in the hands of another owner. To entail an estate is to divide the fee-simple among successive owners.
Other compounds of tailler are retailler, to shred, snip, cut very often; retailles, shreds, clippings; détailler, to piece-meal, to cut into pieces. Hence E. retail, to sell in small portions; détails, the separate elements of which a matter is composed.
Tailor. Fr. tailleur d'habits, a cutter of clothes. Tailler, It. tagliare, to cut. ON. tálga, telgja, to cut, hew, to form by cutting. See Tally.
-tain. -tent. -tin-. Lat. teneo, tentum (in comp. -tineo), to hold; contineo, to keep in, keep together, withhold, contain; abstineo, to hold from, to abstain; continentia, keeping in, temperance, continence; pertineo, to hold on, to reach to, to belong to, &c.
Taint. A touch of corruption. Fr. attaindre (Lat. attingere), to reach or attain to, to touch or hit in reaching, to overtake in going; attaint, raught, attained to, touched.—Cot.
To Take. ON. tak, grip, hold, grapple in wrestling; taka, to seize, take, touch. Sw. tag, hold, touch; fatta tag i, to seize hold of; släppa tag, to let loose; ártag, the stroke of an oar; taga, to seize, to take. Tag hit, give it me. Tagas, to struggle, to contend. Du. tacken, tangere, arripere, apprehendere, harpagare, capere, figere.—Kil.
Radically identical with Lat. tangere, tactum, to touch; and with It. attaccare, Piedm. taché, to fasten, to join one thing to another. Compare tachessé, to contend, dispute, quarrel, with N. takast, Sw. tagas, to wrestle, contend, dispute. Taché la rogna da un autr, to take the itch from another; taché la rogna a un, to give it to another. Taché 'l feu, to take fire, also to light a fire, to communicate fire. To attack is to seize hold of one, to commence the struggle.
Talc. ON. talgusteinn, talgstein, soapstone, talc, from being easily cut with a knife or split into panes; ON. telgja, to cut, carve. Herra biskup skal upp láta gera brjóstít (the front of the church), ok í setja tvislöngan glygg með talgusteini, a twolight window paned with talc.
Tale.—To Tell. ON. tala, telja, to speak, say, talk; tal, speech, number; telja tálu, to make a speech. Telja is also to reckon or count. Du. taele, speech, discourse; taelen, to speak; taelen, tellen, to count.—Kil. G. zahl, number; zählen, to reckon, count; erzählen, to tell, relate. See Talk.
Talent. Lat. talentum, Gr. τάλαντον, a certain weight of money. In the sense of natural endowment the term is taken from the Parable of the Ten Talents.
Talisman. Fr., Sp. talisman, Ar. telsam, a magical image, on which are mystical characters as charms against enchantments. Byzantine Gr. τέλεσμα, incantation.
To Talk. In seeking the origin of talk two principles must be borne in mind: first, that the words by which this idea is expressed have commonly signified in the first instance to talk much or imperfectly, to chatter, tattle, lisp; as Gr. λάλεω, to speak, compared with G. lallen, to speak indistinctly, to lisp, stammer, babble, or Gr. φράζω, to speak, compared with E. prate. And secondly, that the sense of tattling or idle talk is often expressed by forms taken from the splashing or dashing of water. So we have Swab. schwappeln, to splash, also to speak quick and confusedly; and with inversion of the mute and liquid, Swiss schwalpen, to splash. Da. dial. svalpe, to tattle, E. dabble, to paddle in wet, G. dial. dabbeln, to tattle.—D. M., 3. 373. Now E. daggle, or taggle (Mrs B.), is to trail in wet and dirt; bedaggled, bedabbled, dirtied; daggly, wet, showery.—Hal. To these correspond OberD. taggeln, tegeln, tekeln, dekeln, to dabble, daub; teglich, teklich, smeary, dirty (Deutsch. Mundart, 3. 344); as well as It. taccolare, which must originally have signified to splash or dabble, as shown by taccato, bedashed, speckled; taccola, a bungling, botching piece of business (compare dabble, to work imperfectly, to bungle), also babbling, chattering, prating.—Fl. Hence taccola, a jackdaw, a bird eminent for chattering. A like inversion to that which was shown in schwappeln and schwalpen, or in sputter and spurt, squitter and squirt, leads from E. daggle and G. taggeln, or It. taccolare, to Bav. dalken, to dabble, also to bungle, cobble, work unskilfully; verdalken, to besmear; dalk, a dauber, bungler; dalken, dolken, dolkezen, to stutter, sputter, speak imperfectly, to speak (in a contemptuous sense), or, finally, to talk.—Schm. Talgen, talken, to dabble, to smear, then to tattle, or talk foolishly.—Sanders. So also from It. taccola we pass to Pl.D. taalke, talk, a daw, a tattling woman.—Brem. Wtb. On the other hand, we cannot doubt that the It. form is identical with Bav. dachal, dahhel, dahel, Swab. dahle, G. dohle, a daw. Thus It. taccolare, to chatter, is connected with G. dahlen, dallen, to stammer, chatter, tattle, trifle. 'Wer lehrt dem Psittacum unser wort dallen?'—Sanders. Silesian tallen, to stammer. 'Die tunge lautet und tallt.'—Deutsch. Mund. 4. 188. Swiss talen, dalen, to speak imperfectly, to drawl. ON. tala, to speak or talk.
Tall. Fr. taille, cut, and thence the size or stature of a creature. A tall man is a man of good stature.

Tallow. G. talg, ON. tolgr, the solid fat of ruminants. Apparently from being considered as the means of daubing or smearing. G. talgen, talken, dalken, to dabble, daub. ' Sich im Kuhdreck betalken;' to daub oneself with cowdung.—Sanders. Swiss talggeti, a soft mass, as an ill-cooked pudding; Swab. talket, talkicht, clammy, doughy, fat; Bav. verdalken, to bedaub, smear. Swiss dolgg, talk, a blot of ink; verdolggen, vertolken, to bedaub. See Talk.

Tally. From It. tagliare, Fr. tailler, to cut, is formed Fr. taille, a tally or piece of wood on which an account was kept by notches. When complete the wood was split in two, with corresponding notches on each piece. Hence to tally, to correspond exactly. The root may be preserved in It. tacca, a notch or tally; also, as Fr. taille, the size or stature of a man. Here the syllable tac seems, like E. hack, to represent the sound of striking with a sharp instrument. It. tach-tach, sound of knocking at a door. A frequentative form from this root, analogous to Du. hackelen, to chop, or E. haggle, might give rise to tagliare, tailler.

Talon. The claw of a bird of prey, properly the hind-claw. ' Talant of a byrde, the hynder clawe, talon, ergot.'—Palsgr. Lat. talus, the heel.

Tamarind. Arab. tamr hindi, Indian dates.

Tambour. See Tabor.

Tame. Du. tarn, taem; G. zahm, tame. ON. tamr, accustomed to; —vid sund, accustomed to swimming; —á báthar hendr, accustomed to use either hand; temja, to accustom to, to tame. Goth. gatamjan, to tame. Lat. domare, Gr. δαμάω, to subdue, to tame.

Tammy. Fr. tamis, It. tamigio, tamiso, Du. teems, tems, a boulter, strainer, sieve. Fr. estamine, the stuff tamine, also a strainer.—Cot. It. stamigna, a strainer made of goat's hair, from stame, Lat. stamen, the fixed threads in a loom, woof, yarn.

To Tamper. To meddle with; probably a metaphor from the tempering of clay. So Sw. kladda, to dabble, to do a thing in a slight manner, to meddle without fitness or necessity, to tamper.—Widegren. Lang. tapo, clay; tapio, dab or daub, tempered clay for wall building.

Tampion.—Tamkin.—Tomkin. Fr. tampon, a bung or stopper; Lang. tampa, to shut, stop; fenestro tampado, a shut window; se tampa las aourelhos, to stop one's ears; tampes, shutters; tampo, a tank or reservoir. A nasalised form of Lang. tapa, Fr. tapper (Cot.), to stop. See Tap. The same corruption as that of tamkin from tampion is seen in pumpkin from pompion.

Tan.—Tawny. Fr. tan, bark of young oak for tanning; taner, to tan or dress leather with oak bark; tané, tanned, also swart, dusky, tawny of hue, as things which have been tanned.—Cot. Bret. tann, oak; aval tann, an oak-apple or oak-gall; G. tanne, a fir-tree, the bark of which is also applicable to tanning.

Tandem. A mode of driving from the carriage seat two horses one before the other. From a joking abuse of Lat. tandem, at length.

Tang. I. A rank taste.—B. A metaphor from a ringing sound. Twang and tang are both used for a loud ringing sound and a strong taste. There is a pretty affectation in the Almain which gives their speech a different tang from ours.—Holden in Todd. His voice was something different from ours, having a little twang like that of street music.—Search. He then owned that he had received heavenly gifts in earthen vessels, and though the liquor was not at all impaired thereby in substance or virtue, it might get some twang of the vessel.—Search in R. To tang bees is to ring a bell or make a noise with a piece of metal on a shovel or the like at the swarming of bees.—Mrs Baker. Fr. tan-tan, a cattle-bell. Sp. tangir, tañer, to play on a musical instrument; tañido, tune, sound, clink. Maori tangi, cry, sound. Arabic, tantanat, sound, re-echoing of musical instruments, murmuring of water; tanin, noise, sound, echo.

2. The part of a knife that runs up into the handle; the tongue of a buckle. ON. tangi, a narrow tongue of land; the tang of a knife or a sword. Gael. teanga, tongue.

Tangent.—Tangible. See Tact.

Tangled. Tangled, or in the E. of England twangled, is twisted together in a confused intricate mass. Now twangling signifies in the first instance a dissonant jingling sound like unskilful playing on a stringed instrument, and thence in a secondary sense the term is applied to a confused involved texture. So from brangle, representing a continuous jarring sound, to embrangle, to perplex or entangle. Rumble and grumble represent a broken muttering sound, rumple and crumple a broken uneven state of surface.

Tank. Ptg. tanque, a pond, reservoir, basin of water, a receptacle of water pounded or stopped up, from Prov. tancar, to stop, to shut. Tancar la boca, to shut the mouth. Langued. tanca, to stop; tanco, the bar of a door. Ptg. tanchar, to stick into; tanchão, a stake, a stanchion. Sp. taco, a stopper or plug. Cat. taco, a ramrod, a mace at billiards.
The ideas of sticking into, stopping, shutting, are also expressed by the parallel root tap, tamp; as in Castrais tapa, to stop, to stuff or satisfy; tapofam, a damp-er, a stop-hunger, a piece of meat given at the beginning of a feast; tap, a stop-per; tampa, tanca, to stop, shut, cease; tampadou, tancadou, a stopper; tanco, a stake; Langued. tampa, to stop or shut; fenestra tampado, a shut window; tampos, shutters; tampadou, tancadou, a bolt or bar; tampo, estampo, a tank or reservoir. See Stanch, Dam.
Tankard. Fr. tanquard, Du. tanckaerd, N. tankar, a can with a spout; dankar, a jug, jar. Commonly supposed to be a corruption of Lat. cantharus.
Tansy. Fr. tanasie, Sp. atanasia, from Gr. αθανασια, immortality.
Tantalise. Fr. tantaliser, from the proper name Tantalus.
Tantamount. Lat. tantus, so much, and amount.
Tap. 1. A form analogous to rap or pat, signifying a light blow. Fr. taper du pied, to rap with the foot. Bohem. tepati, to strike with a hammer, a stick, &c.; Russ. topat', to stamp with the feet.
2. Then as ON. stappa, E. stamp, are specially applied to striking endways, as with a pestle, the root tap or top takes the sense of striking endways, thrusting into. We speak of the woodpecker tap-ping with his beak, whence apparently Boh. top, the beak of a bird; toparka, the stamper of a churn; Sp. topar, to but or strike with the head, run against. Hence may be explained Pl.D. tappe, G. zapf, Du. tap, a plug thrust in to stop a hole.
With the addition of an initial s we have Du. stappen, to step, to set down the foot, and stoppen, to thrust into, to stuff or stop.
Sp. tapar, to stop up, choke, cover; tapar la boca, to stop one's mouth; tapon, a plug, bung, cork. Lap. tappet, to shut.
Tape. AS. tæppe, properly the tip or corner of a garment, then the tape or tie which is fastened to it. A like transfer-ence of sense is seen in the sheet of a sail, which signifying in the first instance the corner of a sail, is transferred to the rope fastened to the corner, by which the sail is managed.
Taper.—To Taper, AS. taper, tapor, a waxlight. The question arises whether it is so called because of the tapering form; or whether to taper is to assume the form of a taper or dip-candle. If the former is the case, a satisfactory origin may be found in a tap or plug for stop-ping a hole, which is smaller at the fore-most end. A tap root is a root of taper-ing form. G. zapfen is applied to different objects of tapering form, as the uvula, an icicle, a fircone; and the resemblance be-tween an icicle and a dip-candle is strik-ing enough.
Tapestry. Fr. tapisserie, tapestry; tapis, Prov. tapit, Sp. tapeto, Lat. tapete, hangings for covering walls. Sp. tapar, to stop up, conceal, mantle, cover.
Tar. AS. teor, tyrwa, ON. tjara, G. theer, Gael. tearr. Fin. terwa, tar. The root seems to be preserved in Swiss targ-gen, toorggen, daarggeln, dohrggeln, tir-gen, dirggen, dirggelen, to dabble, daub, work in dough, handle uncleanlily, bun-gle; E. dial. teer, to daub with clay, to plaster; teerwall, a clay-wall.
To Tar. To set on, to provoke, OFr. atarier, atarjer. Si Deus te atarried vers me: si Dominus incitat te adversum me.—Livre des Rois. Il vient pur nus at-tarier e escharnir: he comes to provoke and to scorn us.—Ibid. They have ter-rid thee to ire.—Wiclif, Psalms. Du. tergen, G. zergen, Pl.D. targen, tarren, tirtarren, to irritate, provoke. Da. tirre, to tease.
The origin seems to be an imitation of the sound of a dog snarling, used for the purpose of setting the animal on to fight. Sc. tirr, to snarl; quarrelsome, crabbed. Swab. zerren, to be in ill humour. So w. hyr, the gnar or snarl of a dog, a word used by one who puts a dog forward to fight, a pushing or egging on; hys, a snarl, also used in setting on a dog; hysio, to cause to snarl, to set on.
Taradiddle. An idle story, a falsehood. Formed in the same way as fiddlededee! G. larifari! Langued. tatata! or Fr. tarare! interjections mocking what is said and expressing disbelief. See Tattle.
Tardy. Fr. tardif. It. tardivo, tardo, Lat. tardus; slow.
* Tare. It. tara, Fr. tare, Sp. tara or merma signify the deduction to be made from the gross weight of the merchan-dise on account of the package in which it is contained. Of the two Sp. synonyms, merma is the participle past, mermí or mermá, of the Arab ramá, to reject; and in like manner tara is the Arab. tarha, or, with the article, at-tarha, the substantive of the verb taraha, to reject, deduct, retrench.—Dozy.
Target. Fr. targe, targue. It. targa, targetta, Sp. darga, adarga, OHG. targa, G. tartsche, Gael. targaid, a shield. Commonly referred to Lat. tergus, hide, skin, thence a shield, as being made of hide. Septem taurorum tergora, a shield of seven bull-hides.
Walach. targa, however, signifies certain things made of wicker, as a wicker chimney, a wicker bed, and the old Celtic shield was made of wicker.
Tariff. A book of rates for duties to be laid upon merchandises.—B. Turk. ta'rif, an explaining, describing ; Arab. ta'rif, explanation, notification; 'arif, knowledge.
Tarn. ON. tjörn, a little lake, morass.
To Tarnish. It. ternire, Fr. ternir, to make dim ; terne, dull, lustreless. OHG. tarnjan, to conceal, cover ; tarnkappe, the coat of darkness which made the wearer invisible. AS. deorn, OE. dern, hidden, secret ; dyrnan, to secrete, conceal.
Tarpawlin. Properly tar-palling, a tarred pall or covering for goods.
To Tarry. Fr. tarder, formerly also targer, Grisons targittar, Prov. tardar, tarzar, to delay, tarry, from Lat. tardare.
Tart. 1. AS. teart, teartlic, sharp, biting, pungent. Du. taertig, subacidus, acerbus, immitis.—Kil. Perhaps from Du. tarten, to provoke, defy, as Swiss räss, sharp, cutting, astringent, from Bav. rassen, G. reizen, to provoke, incite.
2. It seems that there was no original difference between Fr. tourte, tourteau, a cake, a loaf of brown bread, and tarte, a pie or pudding, a flat portion of soft materials which consolidates in baking. It. torta, a kind of pastry-work, like a rice-pudding baked ; tortello, a little pudding.—Altieri ; tartera, tarterella, tartarelle, any tartlet or little tart.—Fl. 'Et aliqui loco turlarum et zoncarum dant in principio prandii turtas, quas appellant tartas, factas de ovibus [ovis] et caseo et lacte et zucchero.'—De moribus Placentise, A.D. 1388, in Mur. Diss. 24.
The word has often been explained as if it signified a twist of pastry, from Lat. tortus, twisted ; but, as Scheler remarks, Fr. tarte signifies something flat and squat. It is taken as the type of a squashy consistency in the expression of tarte Bourbonnaise, a mire or slough.—Cot.
The fundamental meaning seems to be a mass of something soft and wet, which when thrown down spreads out and lies flat and broad. Venet. torta cotta al sole, Wall. tourte cuite au soleil, a cowdung.
Swiss datsch, dotsch, a blow with the flat hand; dätschen, to fall with a noise. Then from the noise of a soft thing falling, datsch or dotsch is a cake, a lump of something soft, something unseemly broad, ill-baked bread, doughy pastry ; datschig, dotschig, doughy, soft, broad and flat, dumpy ; Swab. daatsch, a dumpling, doughy pastry, unrisen pastry ; datschen, to work in pastry ; Bav. datschen, dotschen, to press down something soft ; datsch, dotsch, mash of apples, potatoes, &c., pudding, dumpling. Kuedatsch, a cowdung. The addition of an r in the imitative syllable gives Bav. trätschen, trätscheln, to dabble in the wet ; tartschen, tortschen, to dabble, splash, bedaub; tartsch, mash (brei) of any kind, mess.—Deutsch. Mundart, 4. 444 ; tärtsch, ill-cooked food.—Ibid. 3. 9. Grisons truscher, turschar, to stir up, mix, knead ; turschimm, dabbling. Fr. torchis, a mixture of clay and cut straw for daubing walls ; torcher, to wipe, properly to daub or smear.
Tartan. A word not known in Gaelic, and probably taken from Fr. tiretaine, Du. tireteyn, Milanese tarlantanna, linsey-woolsey. In later times the word has come over again in the shape of tarlatan, a kind of clear muslin.
Tartar. Lat. tartarum, the hard deposit in wine-casks.
Task. Fr. tasche, Rouchi tasque, a definite amount of work set one to do ; formerly used in the sense of tax, or a definite sum appointed one to pay. Du. tackse, taescke, a task; tackswerck, task-work.—Kil. Lat. taxare, to estimate, to tax. W. tasg, tax, tribute, also task ; gweithio ar dasg, to work by the job ; tasga, to tax, rate, assess.
Task that a prince gadereth. taulx.—Palsgr.
In this first year he lost Normandy and Anjou; and every ploughland tasked at 3s. to get it again.—Grey Friars' Chron. 1 Hen. viii.
Tassel.—Tercel. It. terzolo, Fr. tiercelet, a male hawk, said to be a third less than the female.
Tassel. A hanging tuft of silk or the like for ornament. Entirely distinct from It. tassello, Fr. tasseau, Lat. taxillus, a die or small cube. The relationship of E. tassel is with G. zote, zotte, zottel, a lock of shaggy hair, tuft, fringe, tassel.—Sanders. Goldne zottlein auf dem hut. Mit halbstiefeln und zotteln daran : Hessian boots with tassels. Die sogenannte zatteln, eine zerschneidung der ränder in lange zacken oder lappen. OHG. zata, zota, juba, villus, fimbria.—Graff. Swiss zattig, zattelt, shaggy, ragged. Henneberg zassel, a fringe of mud hanging to the skirts of a garment, agrees exactly with the E. word. Bav. zasel, zassel, a catkin or male tassel-like flowers of the hasel, &c., hanging wavering in the wind. We may compare also Bav. doschen, with the dim. doschl, anything bushy, a nosegay, a tassel; Da. dusk, a tuft or tassel. See Tussock, Tatter.

Taste. It. tastare, Fr. taster, tâter, to handle, to feel or examine by the sense of touch; afterwards applied to examining by the sense of taste. G. tasten, to feel or grope. The primary sense is probably to strike with the hand, afterwards softened down to the idea of handling. G. Fliegentaschen, a fly-flap; maultasche, a slap on the chops. Swab. datsch, a blow; dätscheln, to pat or stroke; G. tätscheln, to stroke; tatsche, a clumsy hand; Tatze, paw of beast; Bav. Tascheln, to plash with rain; taschen, tascheln, tätscheln, to strike with a clashing sound, to handle, to feel.

Tatter. Clothes hanging in rags.—B. ON. tòturr, a rag, tatter. Hlifir han- gandi tòtr: there is shelter in a hanging tatter. The radical image is the flutter- ing of the torn fragment. Bav. tattern, to tremble, shiver; tatterman, a scare- crow, a figure dressed in rags that flutter in the wind. So E. dial. jouder, to chat- ter with cold; jouds, rags. Connected forms are seen in G. zotte, zottei, a hang- ing lock, tassel; zottelig, shaggy; zottet, zotlet, shaggy, tattered.—Schmeller. Swiss zattig, zattelt, shaggy, ragged; zattli, a tattered person. OHG. zotarjan, MHG. zotteren, to hang in locks. Chaucer uses tatterwags, as Henneberg zassel, for a fringe of dirt hanging to the skirts of a garment.

—with graie clothis nat full clene But frettid full of tatarwags.—R.R. 7210. The meaning of which is apparent from the original— Qui ont ces larges robes grises Toutes fretelles de crotes.—l. 12663.

Banff tatterwallop, to hang or flutter in rags.

To Tattle. A continuance of broken sound without sense is represented by the syllables ta ta ta, which are used in- terjectionally in Languedoc, as tarare! in French, or tâterletat! in Pl.D., to ex- press contempt or disbelief of what is said. In the latter dialect tateln is to gabble like a goose, to talk much and quick; eene oolde tâtel, an old tattler. Taatgoos, tatelgoos, a goose in children's language, a tattling woman; titeltateln, to tattle continuously. It. tattamelare, Pl.D. taotern (Danneil), to prattle. Du. tateren, to stammer, to sound as a trum- pet.

Tattoo. The imprinting of permanent characters on the living body, a name brought from the South Sea Islands. Tahiti tatau, sign, writing; Maori ta, to cut, to print, to tattoo.

Tattoo. The beat of the drum is re- presented by various combinations of the syllables rap, tap, tat, or the like. E. rubadub, dubadub; Fr. rataplan, rantan- plan, Piedm. tantan, tarapatapan, tara- patan, Sp. taparapatan, tapatán. It. tap- patà (Vocab. Milan.), from the last of which we pass to Du. taptoe, the imme- diate parent of our tattoo. It is easy to see that the final toe of taptoe is nothing but the accented tán or tá of the Sp. and It. forms.

To Taunt. From Fr. tancer, tanser, to chide, rebuke, check, taunt (Cot.), as "E. jaunt from Fr. jancer. In tancer, ten- cer, two words seem to be confounded, one from It. tenzone, tenza, OFr. tançon, tance, contention, dispute, quarrel; and the other probably from It. tacca, taccia, Fr. tache, and with the nasal, tanche, a spot, stain, blemish, reproach. 'Ausi porte Jesu Christ son sergant parmi l'ordure du monde et parmi les pechiez, qu'il ne comprent tenche de mortel pe- chiez.'—St Graal, c. 31. 308.

From the latter of these forms may be explained Fr. tancer, Picard teincher, to chide (Roquef.), as It. tacciare, to tax, charge, or accuse, to blame (Altieri), from taccia, a blot. But if we may rely on the forms cited by Florio, another derivation equally plausible may be found in It. tansa, an assessment, a taxing, a taxing with a fault; tansare, to assess for any payment, to tax, to chide, rebuke.

Tautology. Gr. ταυτολογία; ταυτὸ ταυτὸν, the same thing.

Tavern. Lat. taberna, properly, ac- cording to Cic. (from tabula), a boarded hut, a shop, warehouse, tavern.

To Taw. AS. tawian, Pl.D. tauen, to taw or dress leather; Du. touwen, mace- rare, emollire, depsere, coria perficere, pa- rare, agitare, subigere.—Kil. To taw leather is properly to dress it soft. 'I tawe a thynge that is styffe, to make it soft, je souple. It is styffe yet, but tawe it a little.'—Palsgr. Sc. taw, to work mortar, to knead. From Pl.D. taa, tage, taw, Du. taey, G. zähe, tough.
Tawdry. Vulgarly showy. Commonly explained from the cheap finery sold at Saint Awdry's fair. But there is much that is hypothetical in this explanation. If such a fair was really held in the Isle of Ely it does not appear how its wares got such celebrity. The term is applied in the earlier instances to a kind of lace or necklace. ' The primrose chaplet, tawdry lace and ring.'—Faithful Shepherd.
Not the smallest beck But with white pebbles makes her tawdries for her neck.—Polyolbion.
Now in the legend of St Ethelred she is said to have died of a swelling in her throat, which she considered as a judgment for having been vain of her necklaces in her youth. She said when dying, ' memini cum adhuc juvencula essem collum meum monilibus et auro ad vanam ostentationem onerari solitum. Quare plurimum debeo divinæ providentiæ quod mea superbia tam levi pœnæ defungatur.' Hence the author explains the name of tawdry for a necklace. ' Solent Angliæ nostræ mulieres torquem quendam ex tenui et subtili serica confectum collo gestare quam Ethelredæ torquem appellamus, forsan in ejus quod diximus memoriam.'—Harpsfield, Hist. Eccles. Ang. in Nares.
Tawny. See Tan.
Tax. Fr. taxe, Lat. taxare, to value, assess.
To Teach. AS. tæcan, to instruct, direct. Goth. gateihan, to announce, make known ; G. zeigen, to show ; Sanscr. dich, show ; ddich, teach ; Lat. docere, to teach ; dicare, to appoint ; indicare, to declare, proclaim, appoint ; index, what points out ; Gr. δείκνυμι, I point out, show, teach.
Team.—To Teem. A team of horses is properly a string of horses drawing a plough or waggon. ON. taumr, a rein, bridle, rope. Pl.D. toom, a rein, and thence a line of progeny, a race ; avertoom, the ascending, neddertoom, the descending line ; AS. team, anything following in a row, race, progeny; tyman, to beget, propagate, teem.
The same metaphor is seen in ON. tjóðr, Pl.D. tider, Du. tudder, a tether, a rope for tying cattle ; AS. tuddor, offspring, progeny ; tyddrian, to procreate.
To Tear. Goth. gatairan, to break up, destroy ; distairan, to tear asunder ; gataura, rent, separation ; OHG. zerati, ferzeran, to destroy ; Du. terren, to tear, separate, destroy. W. tori, to break ; Bret. terri, to break, destroy, abrogate, abolish.
Tear. AS. tær, tæher, OHG. zahar, Goth. tagr, Gr. δάκρυ, Lat. lacryma, W. deigr, Gael. deur.
To Tease.—Teasel.—Tose.—Touse. Du. teesen, to pick, pluck, pull about, touse ; G. zausen, to pick or tease wool, to touse or pull about ; Bav. zaisen, zaiseln, to tease wool, to pluck, pill. ' Wittwen und waisen schaben und zaisen' to shave and pill widows and orphans. Zaisel, a teasel, a plant of which the head is used in teasing or raising the nap of cloth.
Sc. tousle, to rumple, handle roughly, pull about ; tousie, rough, shaggy, dishevelled.
The radical idea is picking at a lock or entangled mass. G. zotte, Bav. zottel, zozen, zozel, a cot or lock of hair ; Sw. totte. Da. tot, a bunch of flax or wool; Sc. tate, teat, tatte, a flock of wool, flax, hay, &c., a lock of hair. ON. tæta, a bit, tæta, to pull to pieces, to tease wool.
To Tease. To annoy for the purpose of provocation. Probably from the figure of irritating a dog, setting him on to attack by hissing or snarling sounds. To tice a dog is in Pembrokeshire to set him on to attack another animal. OFr. enticer, to excite, provoke. Sw. tussa, to set on, to provoke. See Entice. The Da. tirre, to tease, corresponds to E. to tar or ter, to set on. G. reizen is to entice, to provoke, and also to tease.
Teat. Pl.D. titte, G. zitze, W. teth, Gael. did, It. tetta, cizza, zizza, Fr. teton, Gr. τίτθος, Pol. cyc (tsyts), OHG. deddi, E. dial. diddy, breast. Goth. daddjan, ON. totta, to suck.
Technical. Gr. τέχνη, art.
-tect.—Tegument. Lat. tego, tectum, to cover, preserve : as in Protect, Detec- tion.
To Ted. To turn or spread abroad new- mown grass. — B. Swiss zetten, zetteln, to separate in small parts, especially applied to the spreading out haycocks with the fork. Zettelkraut, sourkrout, cabbage cut into small bits. Bav. zetten, to strew.
' Sieh, wie zettest du, et ut defluit jusculum, decidunt nuces.' ' Sie zatten pulver:' they scattered powder. Har zetteln, to spread out flax to dry.—Schm.
Probably from the rattling sound of things falling in a scattered way. Swiss zättern, to sound like a heavy shower of rain. Ich höre das wasser zättern. Zattern, zottern, züttern, to let a little fall at a time, to sprinkle. Pl.D. toddeln, to fall in small quantities as corn from a hole in a sack. — Danneil. Hesse, zisseln, to scatter.
Tedious. Lat. tædium, weariness; tædere, to weary, to irk.
To Teem. 1. To bring forth plenteously. See Team.
2. To pour out, to unload a cart.—Hal. Sc. toom, tume, empty, void. ON. tomr, empty, unoccupied; Sw. tömma. Da. tømme, to exhaust, empty. Gael. taom, empty, pour out, bale a boat; taomaire, a pump. Ir. taomaim, to draw water. Rom. Swiss touma, tema, to pour.
Teen. Sorrow, trouble, mischief; to teen, to excite or provoke.—B. AS. teona, reproach, injury, wrong; teonan, tynan, to incense, irritate, provoke. OFr. attayne, ataine, anger, hatred, vexation, dispute. Flem. tanen, tenen, irritare.—Kil.
The commencement of anger and discord is frequently expressed by the figure of kindling or lighting up, as when we speak of wrath being kindled, or a person being incensed, from incendere, to light up. To teend or teen a candle is still provincially used in the sense of lighting a candle. Fris. tände, täne, tine, to kindle.—Outzen. AS. tendan, Da. tænde, to kindle.
Teetotum.—Totum. Rom. Swiss to-ton.
Teine. A teine of silver, an ingot of silver.—Chaucer. OHG. zain, a rod, reed, arrow, also a bar or ingot of metal. ON. teinn, a thin bar, a spit. Da. teen, a slender rod, spindle. N. tein, a thin stick, shoot of a tree.
Tele-. Gr. τῆλε, at a distance.
To Tell. See Tale.
Temerity. Lat. temeritas; temere, rashly.
Temper.—Temperate. Lat. tempero, to mix, to bring to a proper condition, to moderate, govern, refrain. Temperamentum, temperatura, mixture in due proportions, condition of a thing with respect to the proportion of conflicting qualities; temperies, mixture in due proportions, a good moderation or mean.
Tempest. Lat. tempus, time; tempestas, time, season, weather good or bad, a storm or tempest.
Temple. 1. Lat. templum, originally an open space with a view all round, and as such adapted for observing auguries; a place consecrated for that purpose by the augurs, a building for the worship of the gods.
2. Lat. tempus, pl. tempora. It. tempia, Fr. tempe, the temples of the head or flat spaces behind the eyes.
Temporal.—Temporise. Lat. tempus, temporis, time.
To Tempt.—Attempt. Fr. tenter, Lat. tentare, OFr. tenter, temter, tempter, to try. The signification of the word may be explained from the figure of shaking at a thing in order to ascertain whether it is firm. The syllables representing sounds of different kinds are often applied to signify movements of corresponding character. Thus from ding-dong, representing the sound of large bells, we have to dangle, to swing to and fro. It. dondon represents the sound of bells, and thence is formed dondolare, to swing, toss to and fro, dandle. The sound of a smaller bell is represented by tintin, whence Lat. tintinnire, to ring, tingle. The same elements are applied to movement in It. tentennare, to shake, jog, stir. Tentennare all' uscio, to knock at a door. Tentennio, jogging, shaking; tentennio, the tempter, the devil. The contraction which must be supposed in order to produce tentare from tentennare is precisely that which is found in Fr. tinter, to tingle, from Lat. tintinnire.
Ten. Goth. taihun, taihund, OHG. zehun, zehan, G. zehn, Lat. decem, Sanscr. dasan, Gr. δέκα.
Tenable.—Tenacious.—Tenant.—Tenement.—Tenure. Lat. teneo, tentum, Fr. tenir, to hold; tenant, holding, whence a tenant, one holding land under another. Lat. tenax, Fr. tenace, that holds fast, &c.
Tench. Lat. tinca.
To Tend.—Tender, -tend, -tension. Lat. tendo, tensum, to stretch out, to spread, to reach, to bend his course; attendo, to direct the mind to, to attend, and thence E. tend, to wait upon; extendo, to stretch out from; distendo, to stretch apart, &c. A tender is a stretching out or offering of something.
Tender. Fr. tendre, Lat. tener.
Tendon. It. tendone, tendine, the sinew which fastens the muscles to the bones like a string to the bow; tendere, to stretch.
Tendril. The tender shoot of a plant, now confined to the twisting claws of climbing plants, probably from having been chiefly applied to the shoots of the vine. It. tenerume and Fr. tendron signify the tender shoot of a plant, as well as cartilage or gristle considered as the young or tender state of bone. Tenerella, a young girl.—Altieri. Tenerina, a tendrel or tender sprig of plants.—Torriano.

Tennis. A game in which a ball is driven to and fro with rackets. To tennis is used by Spencer in the sense of driving to and fro. 'These four garrisons issuing forth upon the enemy will so drive him from one side to another and tennis him amongst them.'—State of Ireland. It is true that the word here used may be taken from the game of tennis, but it is possible, on the other hand, that it may show the origin from whence the name of the game is taken. Now tennis in the foregoing sense might well arise from Fr. tamiser, Du. temsen, to boult or searce, an operation affording a lively image of an object driven to and fro from one side to the other. A similar change of m before J into n is seen in E. tense, from Fr. temps.

Tenon. Fr. tenon, It. tenone, a projection made to fit into a mortise; the leathern holdfasts of a target. That by which something holds, from tenir, to hold.

Tense. OFr. tens (Fr. temps), Lat. tempus, time.

-tent. In content, retentive, &c. See -tain.

Tent. I. Lat. tentorium, Fr. tente, a tent. Fr. tenture, a stretching, extending, displaying; tenture d'une chambre, the hangings of a chamber. It. tenda, a tent or any cloth to hang before a window or shop to keep off the sun. Tendere, Fr. tendre, to stretch, display, spread.

2. It. tenta, a surgeon's probe or searching needle, from tentare, to try, to search a sore, as probe, from probare, to try or prove.

Tenter. Fr. tendoires, frames used by clothiers for stretching cloth. 'Quand les étoffes ont passé le moulin on les étale sur ces tendoires pour les faire sécher.'—Beronie in v. Tendas. Tentar, for cloth, tend, tende. — Palsgr. Lang. tentâ, to spread out cloth as a shelter against the sun; tento, an awning. Fr. tendre, to stretch; tenture, a stretching, spreading, extending, displaying.—Cot. w. deintur, a tenter, is borrowed.

Tenuity, -tenuate. Lat. tenuis, thin; attenuo, extenuo, to make thin, to lessen. See Thin.

Tepid. Lat. tepidus; tepeo, to be warm.

Tergiversation. Lat. tergiversari; tergus, the back, versare, to turn.

Term.—Terminate.—Terminus. Lat. terminus, a bound, landmark, limit, end; Gr. τέρμα, -ατος, a goal, bound, end.

Termagant. A ranting, bold woman.

TESTAMENT From Termagant or Tervagant, one of the supposed deities of the Mahometans, represented in our old plays as a personage of a most violent character. 'Gronnyng upon her lyke Termagauntes in a play.'—Bale in Todd.

So help me, Mahoun of might, And Termagant, my God so bright. Guy of Warwick in N.

It. Termegisto, Tremegisto, the child of thunder and of the earthquake, by met. a great quarrellous boaster.—Fl.

Ternary. Lat. ter, thrice; ternus, three and three together.

Terrace. It. terrazza, terracia, coarse earth, rubble, rubbish; an open walk, flat roof.—Fl.

Terrestrial.—Territory. Lat. terra, the earth.

Terrier. I. A small dog used to hunt badgers, foxes, or rabbits in their holes. Fr. terrier, the hole, burrow, or earth of a cony or fox.—Cot.

2. Fr. terrier, papier terrier, the court-roll or catalogue of all the names of a Lord's tenants, and the rents they pay and the services they owe him; from terre, land.

Terrine.—Tureen. Fr. terrine, an earthen vessel, with us confined to the vessel that holds soup.

Terror.—Terrible. Lat. terreo, to frighten. Sw. darra, to shiver, to tremble.

Terse. Lat. tergeo, tersum, to wipe; tersus, wiped, clean, neat.

Tertiary. Lat. tertius, the third.

Tesselated. Lat. tessera, a square piece of anything, a die to play with; tessella, a small square tile, to be used in mosaic work.

Test.—Testaceous. 'Test is a broad instrument made of maribone ashes hooped about with iron, in which refiners do fine, refine, and part gold and silver from other metals, or (as we used to say) put them in the test or trial.'—Blount, Glossographia, 1679. The term is then metaphorically applied to any operation by which the quality of a thing is tried.

From Lat. testa, shell, earthen vessel, potsherd, was taken It. testo, an earthen pitcher, a goldsmith's cruze or melting-pot, the test of any silver or gold.—Fl.

Fr. test, têt, shell, potsherd, test.

Lat. testaceus, made of brick or tile, having a shell.

Testament.—Testify, -test. Lat. testis, a witness; testor, to bear or call to witness, to make his will. Protestor, to declare against a thing. Contestor, to come to an issue ; contestatio, the trial of a cause by hearing both sides, a contest. Tester. It. testiera, the testern or headpiece of anything, crown of a hat, head of a cask, &c. It. testa, Fr. tête, the head, are from Lat. testa, an earthen pot, a shell, analogous to G. kopf, from OHG. kopf, a cup.—Diez. The dim. testula gives It. teschio, the scull.

Tether. ON. tjóðra, to tether. Fris. tudder, Pl.D. tider, tier, a tether. Gael. taod, a halter, hair-rope, reins ; teadhair (tyaoer), to tether. Manx tead, teid, a rope.

Tetra-. Gr. prefix τέτρα, for τέτραπα, four.

Tetter. A humour accompanied with redness and itching. — B. The word tetter was used in the sense of itching. It. pizzicare, to itch and smart, to tetter ; pizza, a kind of itching scurf, tetter, or ringworm.—Fl. It was shown under Itch that the name of the affection was taken from the tremulous or twitching movements to which it leads ; and in the same way tetter must be connected with ON. titra, Suffolk titter, Bav. tattern, G. zittern, to tremble; whence zittermahl, zitter, a tetter or ringworm ; zitteraal, an electrical eel.

Text. — Texture, -text. Lat. texo, textum, to weave ; textum, textus, a weaving or web, a composition, the subject of a discourse. Prætexo (to weave in front), to border, cover, encompass, and met. to colour, cloak, excuse, pretend ; prætextum, a border, a pretence, pretext.

Thane. AS. thegen, thegn, a minister, disciple, attendant, a soldier, servant of the king, nobleman ; ON. thegn, a brave man, freeman, man, warrior ; thegnskapr, bravery, generosity, honour ; OHG. degan, a male, a soldier, disciple ; edildegan, nobleman ; heridegan, a warrior ; swertdegan, a guardsman ; deganheit, bravery, valour.

The word may perhaps be accounted for from the sword being taken as the emblem of the male sex as the distaff of the female. OFlem. sweerdmaghe, sweerdside, relations on the male side ; spillemaghe, spindel-maghe, relations on the female side. Fris. ' Ende sint hia lika-sib dia sweerdsida ende dia spindelsida ;' the male and female side are in the same degree of consanguinity. In this way from G. degen, a sword, the word might come to signify a male child, young man, warrior.

Thank. — Think. Goth. thagkjan, thankjan, G. denken, to think ; Goth. thugkjan, G. dünken, to seem or appear, to present itself in thought. Gr. δοκεῖ, ἔδοξε, it seems, seems good ; δοκῶ, ἔδοξα μοι, I seem to myself, I think ; δοκή, a vision. Lith. dingti, to seem ; man ding, methinks, it seems to me. Kas dingsta taw, what is your opinion ? Dingoti, to think ; dingstis, opinion.

AS. thanc, thought, will, favour, thanks. Heora agnes thances, of their own will. Thurh uncres hearran thanc, through the will or favour of our lord. Thanks are a recognition of good will, an expression on our part of the feeling which an intended kindness should produce. Bav. dank, will, voluntary act ; meines dankes, of my own accord ; dankes, willingly.

ON. thekkja, to observe, to recognise ; thekkjask, to seem good ; thakka, to thank ; thokka, to take notice of, to think, be of opinion, thekkask, to be agreeable to ; thokki, disposition towards, good will ; thykkja, thótta, thót, to seem, to think.

Da. tykkes, to think, to be of opinion ; tykke, opinion, judgment, will, pleasure ; tækkes, to please ; tænke, to think ; takke, to thank.

Thatch. AS. thac, thæc, a roof, thatch ; theccan, to cover, conceal ; sceometheccan, to cover his nakedness ; thece, cover ; thecen, a roof. Da. tag, roof ; tække, to roof, to thatch. G. dach, a roof ; decken, to cover. Lat. tegere, Gr. στέγειν, to cover ; tectum, στέγη, a roof.

Thaw. AS. thawan, Du. dooden, ontdooden (Kil.), dooijen, E. dial, to dove, ON. thida, theya, Da. tøe, to liquefy, to thaw ; ON. thá, unfrozen earth ; theyr, thaw, mild weather ; OHG. dawjan, G. dauen, verdauen, to digest or dissolve in the stomach. The radical sense is to become soft, to melt. Gael. tais, moist, soft ; taisich, moisten, soften, melt ; Bret. teuzi, to melt, to disappear ; Corn. tedha, to melt, dissolve, thaw ; W. tawdd, melting, dripping ; toddi, to melt. Lat. tabesco, to dissolve, consume, waste away ; tabes, mouldering away, corruption, consumption.

Radically distinct from ON. dögg, Da. dug, Du. daauw, dew, although the two forms are confounded in G. thauen, to dissolve, to thaw, to fall in dew, and in Pl.D. dauen, to fall in dew, to thaw, to digest in the stomach.

Theatre. Gr. θέατρον, from θεάομαι, to behold.

Theft. See Thief.

Theist.—Theo-. Gr. θεός, God.

Theme.—Thesis. Gr. τίθημι, to place, put, and thence θέμα, what is laid down, a proposition, subject of discussion; θέσις, a setting, placing, affirmation.
Theorem.—Theory. From Gr. θεωρός, a spectator, springs θεωρέω, to look at, to contemplate, speculate on, whence θεωρία, a viewing, contemplation, theory; θεώρημα, a speculation of the mind.

Thews, in the sense of manners, quali-ties (AS. theawas), is nearly obsolete, and can hardly be the same word with thews in the sense of muscles, brawn. Thew in the latter sense seems identical with thigh, the fleshy part of the leg. ON. thjó, but-tocks, thick part of the thigh, especially in cattle and horses; thjó-leggr, thigh-bone. AS. theoh, Du. diede, diege, die, thigh.

Thick. ON. thyckr, thjukr, close press-ed, tight, thick; G. dick, thick, frequent; Gael. tiugh, thick, close set, frequent. The radical idea seems to be close set, compact, solid, then broad in comparison to length, and should be derived from a verb signifying stick, or thrust into, as compact, from Lat. pangere, to stick into. So also Gr. παχύς, thick, and πηγός, firm, solid, seem connected with πήγνυμι, to drive or stick into, to stiffen, condense; and Esthonian paks, thick, with pakima, to stuff, to cram. The origin of thick may be preserved in Fin. tukkia, to thrust into, to stop; tukko, tuket, a stopper; Esthon. tiikkima, tiikma, to stuff, to cram, and thence tiikkis, a stopper; Magy. dugni, to stick into, to stop; Sc. dook, a peg. The Du. dik, ODu. dijck (K.), thick, would thus be connected with dijck, a dike, a dam, a pond, as Bret. stank, close press-ed, thick, with stank, a pond.

Thief.—Theft. Goth. thiuvs, ON. thjófr, G. dieb, thief.

Thigh. AS. theoh, Du. diede, dije, dieghe, thigh. ON. thjó. See Thews.

Thill. AS. thil, a stake, boarding, planking, the pole or shafts of a carriage; ON. thil, thili, a pannelling, boarding.

Thimble. A protection for the thumb.

Thin. ON. thunnr, Du. dun, G. dünn; Lat. tenuis, W. teneu, tenau, Gael. tana.

Thine. Goth. thu, gen. theina, thou; theins, thine.

Thing. ON., AS. thing, G. ding. The primitive meaning seems to be discourse, then solemn discussion, judicial con-sideration, council, court of justice, law-suit, cause, sake, matter, or subject of discourse. 'Zelit thir iz Lucas uuaz iro thing thar tho uuaz:' Lucas tells you what their discourse then was.—Otfried. AS. For minum thingum, on my account, for my sake. On thisum thingum, in this state.

The analogy of the foregoing train of thought would lead us to suppose that Fr. causer, to prattle, talk idly, wrangle, strive together in words (Cot.), G. kosen, to talk, chatter together, indicate the origin of Lat. causa, subject, matter, question, anything that is spoken about or controverted, a suit at law, a cause, which in It. cosa and Fr. chose acquires exactly the sense of E. thing. A like connection may be traced between G. sache, a discussion, matter of discussion, suit at law, affair, thing, ursache, cause, and sagen, to say; or between the cor-responding AS. saca, dispute, suit at law, E. sake, cause, and secgan, to speak, say. A like train of thought is found in Maori mea, to speak, say, do, think, also a thing.

To Think. Thought is considered in primitive languages as internal speech, as in Maori ki, speech, thought, to speak, to think; mea, to speak, think, do; also a thing. See Thing, Thank.

Third. AS. thridda, Goth. thridja, Du. derde, ON. thridi, G. dritte, Lat. ter-tias, Gr. τρίτος, &c. See Three.

To Thirl. AS. thyrel, a hole; thirlian, to pierce a hole through. G. thür, a door; Bav. tier, türlein, tirl, a door, hole, opening. Das hosentürlein, the slit in the trowsers. Türlin an der nasen, the nostril.—Schm. The Lat. forare, to pierce, seems connected in like manner with fores, doors. Goth. thairh, through; thairko, a hole. MHG. dürhel, dürkel, perforated; a hole.

Thirst. Goth. thaursus, dry; ga-thairsan, to become dry; thaursjan, to thirst; thaurseith mik, I am thirsty, I am dry; thaurstei, thirst. ON. thurr, G. dürr, dry; therra, thurka, to dry; thyrstr, thirsty. Gr. τέρσω, to dry up, to parch. Lat. terreo, to parch or dry up, to roast.

Thistle. ON. thistill, G. distel.

Thong. AS. thwang, thwong, ON. thvengr, a strap. Related to whang, a slice or strap, as thwack and whack, thwittle and whittle, thwart and whart. Under this guidance we are led to sup-pose that the original meaning is a separ-ate portion, a slice. See Whang.

Thorn. Goth. thaurnus, ON. thorn, G. dorn, Pol. cierń. Boh. trn, W. draen. Probably from the root preserved in Lith. duriù, durti, to prick, stick.

Thorp.—Throp. A village. G. dorf, S. S. N. torp, a small farm; a troop of cattle. ON. thorp, a bank or eminence, a group of houses, a collection of three people. The origin seems preserved in Gael. tarp, a clod, a lump. Perhaps Lat. tarda, a crowd, may be the same word. See Troop. Thought. See Think.

Thousand. Goth, thusundi, ohg. zenstunt, Lith. tukstantis, Lett. tukstots.

Thowl. Du. dolle, an oar-pin; ON. thollr, a fir-tree, poet. tree in general; rothrar-thollr, an oar-pin. N. toll, tall, fir-tree; toll, a pin, peg, oar-pin; Da. toll, a stopper, an oar-pin.

Thrall. ON. thrall, Gael, traill, a slave.

Thrapple. — Thropple. AS. throt-bolla, the throat-pipe.

To Thrash. — Thresh. ON. thriskja, thryskva. Da. tærske, Sw. troska, G. dreschen, Du. droschen, döschen, Goth. thriskan, to thresh. Imitative of the sound. G. drauschen, to sound as heavy rain; Bav. dreschen, to tramp; durch's koth dreschen, to tramp through the mud; gedräsch, mud, sludge. It. trescare, OFr. trescher, to dance; Sp. triscar, to make a noise with the feet, to stamp, to frisk; Milan. trescá, to thresh, especially to tread out rice and millet under horses' feet. Bohem. treskati, triskati, to knock, strike, crack, crash, chatter; Pol. trzask, crack, crash, clap.

Thrave. A bundle, a certain number of sheaves of corn set up together. Da. trave, a score of sheaves; Sw. trafwe, a pile of wood. The proper meaning seems a handful. AS. threaf, manipulus. ON. thrifa, to gripe, to seize.

Thread. Du. draed, thread; G. draht, drath, thread, wire, straw-band. From drehen, Du. draayen, to turn, twist.

Threat. AS. threán, threagan, threa-wian, to reprove, reprehend, correct, chastise, punish, afflict, vex, torment; threáung, reproof, threats; threat, reproof, threat, punishment; threatan, threatian, to compel (Mat. v. 41), to correct, to threaten. Mid thære bisne men threatian, to warn men by the example. Thæt hio hine threatige to thon thæt he bet do, that she should reprove him to the end that he should do better. Threat-ende, violent.—Mat. xi. 12.
ON. thruga, to press, compel, force; N. truga, trua, to force, to drive by threats or fear; to threaten; Sw. truga, trufwa, to force, to drive by threats or fear; trug, constraint, threats; Da. true, G. drohen, Du. dreigen, drouwen, droten (Kil.), Pl.D. drowen, droen, Fris. truwa, druwa, to threaten. Goth. threihan, to press, crowd, straiten.

Three. Sanscr. tri, Lith. trys, Lat. tres.

Threshold. AS. therscwald, thresc-wald, therscold, therscol, OE. threswold, ON. threskjölldr, thröskulldr, Sw. troskel. Da. tærskel, OG. driscuvili, truscheufel, Bav. drischäufel, Swiss drischübel. Not to be confounded with G. thürschwelle, E. doorsill, which are composed of different elements.
The latter element in threshold is AS. weald, wold, wood; OSw. wal, ol, bar, staff. In the story of Genesis and Exodus we have rodewold, synonymous with rode-tre in Hampole, the roodtree or cross; and archewald, the ark, corresponding to earcebord in Cædmon. Noe sæg ut of the archewolde.—l. 614.
With regard to the first element of the word it must be observed that AS. thers-col, therscel, is a flail as well as threshold, and in Dorset drashel is still used in both senses. Now the notions of treading and threshing are closely connected together, and indeed the primitive mode of threshing was to tread out the corn under the feet of oxen. Milan trescá, to thresh, especially to tread out rice and millet under horses' feet; It. trescare, to dance, Sp. triscar, to stamp, to frisk.
Threshold, then, is the bar on which we tread on entering the house, as Lanc. threshel, Dorset drashel, a flail, is a staff for threshing. In Sweden the two elements of the flail are drapwal or slagwal, the bar that strikes the corn, and hand-wal, handol, the handstaff or handle.

Thrift. Well doing, then economy, sparingness. See Thrive.

To Thrill. Two words seem confounded. 1. To thrill or thirl, to pierce. See Thirl. 2. To tingle, shiver, to feel a sharp tingling sensation. A sudden horror chill Ran through each nerve and thrilled in every vein.—Addison. It. trillare, to shake; Fr. dridriller, to tingle, as mule-bells. See Trill.

To Thrive. —Thrift. ON. thrifa, to seize, snatch, lay hold of; thrifask, properly to take to oneself, then as Da. trives, to thrive, prosper, attain well-being, grow, flourish; thrifnaðr, well-being, advantage, gain; thrifill, a careful, diligent man; thrif, good luck, well-being, diligence, good bodily condition. N. triva.

to snatch ; trive to, to seize hold of ; tri-vast, to thrive, to be satisfied with his circumstances. Comp. G. zunehmen, to increase, improve. Der mensch nimmt zu, the man grows fat. Das zunehmen, increase, growth, thriving.—Küttn. Da. tiltage, to assume, to increase.

Throat.—Throttle. AS. throte, throt-bolla, Du. strot, It. strozza, strozzolo, the throat ; OHG. droza, drozza, fauces, frumen, G. drossel, drostel, the throat, gullet, Bav. dross, the throat, the soft flesh under the chin.

To Throb. To beat in strong pulsations, a notion which the word seems adapted to express in virtue of the abrupt effort with which it is pronounced. We are unable to show any very closely related forms, but may cite G. trab, representing the jolting trot of a horse, or the measured tramp of troops. Pol. drabować, to trot. Sw. trubb (in trubbnos, snubnose, trubbig, stumpy) must once have signified a jog, a projection, to be compared with Du. strobbelen, to stumble, to dash the foot against an obstacle. A lighter kind of action is expressed by the root trep in Lat. trepido, to tremble ; Russ. trepetaty, trepetatsya, to tremble, palpitate, beat.

Throne. Gr. θρονος, Lat. thronus.

To Throw.—Throe. The primitive meaning of the word is to turn or whirl, and thence to cast or hurl. It will be observed that the Lat. torquere has the same two senses, and it is probably a true equivalent of the E. word. Sc. thraw, to wreathe, to twist.

' Thraw the wand while it is green.'

The E. throw is still technically used in the sense of twist or turn when we speak of throwing silk ; and in pottery the man who works the clay upon the wheel is called the thrower. Throwyn or turne vessel of a tre, torno.—Pr. Pm. To throw is still used in the sense of turning wood in the North. A throw, a turner's lathe.—Hal. G. drehen, Du. draaien, to twist, or turn. W. troi, to turn ; Bret. trei, to twist, to turn ; trô, a turn, an occasion ; tro-é-trô, turn about, in turns, successively, W. tro, a turn, a time.

The analogy of these latter forms shows that AS. thrag, thrah, OE. throw, Sc. thraw, a space of time, an occasion, are to be explained in the sense of a turn, and not from Goth. thragjan, to run, as supposed by Jamieson. By throws, in turns.

By throwes eche of them it hadde.—Gower.

The Sc. thraw is used in the sense of wrench or sprain, wrest, distort, oppose, resist, use violence with. Hence, on the one hand, we pass to the idea of pang or agony in the dead throes or agonies of death, the throes of childbirth. The word torture, by which we express the highest degree of pain, at bottom means simply twisting.

On the other hand, the figure of twisting or wresting, taken as the type of violent exertion, leads to ON. thrâ, obstinacy, continuance, opposition ; N. traa, obstinate, enduring, close, opposing, cross, harsh, bitter of taste ; NE. thro, eager, earnest, sharp, bold.

Thoghe the knyght were kene and thro. The outlawys wanne the chylde hym fro. MS. in Hal.

A like train of thought may be observed in Du. wringen, to wring or twist, and wrang, sharp, harsh, sour, hard.

Throng. AS. thrang, a press or crowd ; thringan, G. dringen, to press ; ON. thryngva (thryng, thrunginn), to press ; thrôngr. Da. trang, narrow, compressed, close, pressing, difficult. Corresponding forms without the nasal are found in ON. thruga. Da. trykke, G. drücken, AS. thriccan, to press ; ON. uthrugadr, voluntarily, uncompelled. Goth. threihan, to press, to afflict.

AS. thriccan survives in E. dial. thrutch, to press, thrust ; thrutchings, the last-pressed whey in the making of cheese.

Throstle.—Thrush. G. drossel, drostel. Da. trost, Pol. Russ. drozd, Lat. turdus.

Through. Goth. thairh, OHG. durh, G. durch, AS. thurh, thuruh, through ; W. trw, trwy, trwydd, through, by, by means of ; traws, transverse direction, adverse, cross ; Gael. thar, over, across ; tarsuinn, transverse, across ; Lat. trans, across, over, on the other side.

Thrum. An end of thread. G. trumm, a short, thick piece, an end of candle, rope's end, end of a thread, of a piece of stuff. The ends of the thread of the warp cut off by the weaver are called trumm, in Switzerland triem. Trümmer, in pl., fragments. Von ort bis an das drum, from beginning to end. The primitive form of the word is probably shown in Sw. trubb, stump, preserved in trubbnäsa, trubbnos, a snubnose ; trubbig, stumpy, blunt. See Throb.

To Thrum. To play badly on an instrument. ON. thruma, to make a noise, to thunder. See Strum.

To Thrust. ON. thrysta, to press, thrust. Goth. trudan, to tread, to tread grapes in a press. Lat. trudere, trusum, to thrust. Russ. trud, pains, effort, labour ; potrudit', to put work upon one, to incommode.
Thud. The sound of a dull blow, a violent impulse. Lat. tundo, tutudi, to beat, to pound.
Thumb. OHG. dumo, thumo, G. dau-men, ON. thumall.
Thump. Imitative of the sound of a blow. It. thombo, thumbo, a thump.—Fl. Champ. tombe, a hammer, tombir, to re-sound. Da. dump, Bolognese tonf, sound of a heavy fall, or the fall itself. W. twm-pian, to thump, stamp, strike upon, fall. Fr. tomber, to fall. Lat. dumpis, noise, uproar.
Thunder. G. donner, Lat. tonitru, Fr. tonnerre; Lat. tonare, to thunder. ON. duna, dynja, to bellow, roar, rush ; dunr, dynr, Da. dunder, dundren, rumbling sound, roar, din. Tordenens, kanonernes dundren, the roar of thunder or cannon. To dun was used in OE. in the sense of making a hollow noise.
Now wendeth this oste in wardes ten Ful wel araied with noblemen ; The dust arose, the centre had wonder, The erthe doned like the thonder. Syr Generides, 1. 3774.
Dunnyn in sownde, bundo. — Pr. Pm. Lith. dundeti, Sanscr. tan, to sound. The reduplicate form of It. tontonare, to thunder, to make a confused noise, to grumble (Fl.), shows the imitative nature of the word, and the same may be said of Yolof denadeno, thunder, and Yoruba dondoñ, a drum. Wolof danou, thunder. In the face of forms like these it is a wanton preference of the abstruse to de-rive the word from the Sanscr. root tan, which from signifying stretch, is supposed to express ' that tension of the air which gives rise to sound.' It is impossible that so incongruous a notion as the stretching of the air could ever have occurred to an unscientific mind. The tone or pitch of a musical sound is a totally different notion, which, depend-ing as it does on the tension of the sounding chord, is naturally expressed by the root in question. The imitative sylla-ble is strengthened by the introduction of an r in It. tronare, to thunder ; Da. drön, din, peal, rumbling noise ; G. dronen, to drone.
Thursday, ON. Thorsdagr, the day of Thor, who in the northern mythology filled the place of Jove, the thunderer (Du. dondergod), in classic mythology. Hence, in Mid.Lat. it is called dies Jovis, AS. thunres dag, G. donnerstag.
Thwack. Thwick-thwack represents the sound of blows. Whack is an ana-logous form. So we have thwite and thwittle as well as whittle, to hack with a knife ; twirl, synonymous with whirl; twink with wink ; G. zwerch, and quer, across ; zwehle and quehle, a towel.
Thwart, ON. thvera, to slant ; thwerr, AS. thweorh, OHG. dwerah, G. zwerch, cross, wry ; Du. dwaers, dweers, oblique, transverse ; dweerwind, the whirlwind. ON. um thvert, across, athwart. From the same root signifying turn or twist, which produces Du. dwarlen, to whirl, and E. twirl, AS. thwiril, a churnstaff or whirl for stirring milk. It is seen without the initial dental in Fr. virer, to turn, in E. whirl and Lat. vertere.
To Thwite. See Whittle.
Thyme. Gr. θύμος or θύμον.
Tiara. Gr. τιάρα, a royal head-dress in the East.
Tick. Fr. tique, G. zecke, the parasite on dogs, &c.
Tick.—Ticking. Du. tijk, G. zieche, Bohem. cycha, a tick or covering of a bed. Champ. tiquette, a pillow-case. Grisons teigia, taja, taschia, a tick, sheath, case. Fr. taie d'oreiller, a pillow-case. Probably from G. Ziehen, to draw ; what is drawn over. Weisse ziechen überziehen, to put clean ticks on a bed. On the same principle the tick is also called Überzug in G., and omtreksel in Du., from trekken, to draw.
To Tick. Parmesan tac-tac, Brescian tech-tech, toch-toch. It. ticche-ticche, repre-sent the sound of knocking. Bolognese tectac, a cracker.—Tick, with the thin vowel, represents a lighter sound, and is then applied in a secondary sense to a slight touch. ' Such ticking, such toying, such smiling, such winking, &c.'—Hal. Du. tikken, to pat, touch ; Pl.D. ticken, anticken, to touch gently, as with the tips of the fingers.—Danneil. To tick a thing off is to mark an item with the touch of the pen. Hence to take a thing on tick is to have it jotted down or marked on the score instead of paying. So Pl.D. klitzen, to jot down in writing ; upp den klitz halen, to take upon tick. When this im-port of the term was not understood, a false etymology led precisionists to speak of taking upon ticket.
Ticket. A mark stuck on the outside of anything to give notice of something concerning it. Fr. étiquet, a little note, breviate, or ticket, especially such a one as is stuck up on the gate of a court ; eti-quette, a ticket fastened within a lawyer's bag, &c.—Cot. Rouchi estiquette, a pointed stick, and ludicrously a sword (a peg—Roquefort), from estiquer, to stick into.
To Tickle. Provincially tittle, Lat. titillare, Sc. kittle, Du. kittelen, G. kitzeln, Fr. chatouiller, Wal. catt, kikt, Gael. ciogail, diogail, Magyar csiklani, csikolni, to tickle ; csikos, ticklish. The explanation of the expression may be found in Pl.D. ticken (Danneil), to tick, or touch lightly, to twitch or cause to twitch. A tickling is a light touch that causes one to twitch. See Itch.
Esthon. kiddisema, to crackle, swarm, creep, to tickle ; kuttistama, kõdditema, to tickle ; Fin. kutittaa, to tickle, to itch ; kutinen, ticklish ; kutina, tickling, creeping ; kutia, kutita, to be tickled, to itch ; kutkua, to feel tickling, to itch, to waver, as boggy soil ; kutkuttaa, to dangle, to tickle. fetching the breath quickly, as after running, &c. A tiff or fit of anger ; tiffy, ill-natured, petulant.—Brocket. N. tev, taft, drawing the breath, wind or scent of a beast ; leva, to pant, breathe hard.
A tiff or fit of ill-humour must be explained from snuffing or sniffing the air, as miff, a pet or ill-humour, from Castrais miffa, to sniff. Tiffin, now naturalised among Anglo-Indians, in the sense of luncheon, is the North-country tiffing (properly sipping), eating or drinking out of due season.—Grose.
Tiger. Lat. tigris, Gr. τίγρις.
Tight. Du. dicht, digt, solid, thick, close, tight.—Hal. ON. thettr, Sw. tät, staunch, tight. NE. theat, close, stanch, spoken of barrels when they do not leak. Thyht, hool fro brekynge, not brokyn, integer ; thytyn', or make thyht, integro, consolido.—Pr. Pm.
Tile. AS. tigel, G. ziegel, Lat. tegula, Fr. tuile. From Lat. tegere, to cover.
Till.—Until. G. ziel, OHG. zil, Bohem. cyl, a bound, limit, end.
Till. A drawer, then a money-box. Fr. layette, a till or drawer ; also a box with tills or drawers.—Cot. Possibly from Du. tillen, to lift, to move.
To Till.—Toil. The fundamental signification of AS. tilian and its Germanic equivalents seems to be to direct one's efforts to a certain end, thence to endeavour, to purpose, to procure or get. G. ziel, a bound, limit, mark, end ; zielen, to aim at, to hit ; Bav. zilen, to appoint a set time or place, to beget children ; G. kinder, getreide erzielen, to beget children, to cultivate corn. AS. tilian, to direct one's efforts to a purpose, to labour, to till the soil, to get. 'Sume tiliath wifa :' 'some seek wives.' 'Geornlice ic tylode to awritanne :' 'I earnestly laboured to write.' 'He is wyrthe thæt thu him tilige :' 'ille est dignus ut tu ei operam des, that he was worthy for whom he should do this.—Luc. 7. 4. Bav. zelgen, Du. tuylen, teulen, teelen, to till the soil ; tuyl, agricultura, labor, opera, opus.—Kil. Pl.D. telen, to beget, to cultivate, till.

Tide.—Tidings.—Tidy. AS. tid, hour, time ; G. zeit, Sw. tid, time, season, period, hour, space. Time is the happening of events, the course of what happens. AS. tidan, getidan, to betide or happen. R. G. uses the expression tyde what so by-tyde, happen what may.
For by my trouth in love I durst have sworn Thee should never have tidde so fair a grace.
Chaucer.
The tides are the seasons of the sea, the regular course of ebb and flow. ON. tidindi, events, tidings, news. Tidy, seasonable, orderly, appropriate, neat.
If weather be fair and tidy, thy grain Make speedier carriage for fear of a rain.
Tusser.
G. zeitig, timely, seasonable, mature. Wiclif speaks of tideful and lateful fruits.
Tie. AS. tige, a drawing, efficacy, a tie, from teon (tugon, togen, getogen), Pl.D. teen, tögen, G. ziehen, to draw ; zug, a pull ; zügel, a rein ; AS. tigehorn, a horn for drawing blood, a cupping glass. Tian, getian, to tie.
Tier. OFr. tiere, rank, order. Du. tudder, tuyer, Pl.D. tider, tier, a tether, a row of connected things ; tuyeren, to tether cattle, to connect in a row.—Kil. Pl.D. tidern, tiren, to tie. De ko in't gras tiren, to tether a cow to a stake.
Gael. taod, a halter, hair-rope, cable. Ir. lead, a rope, cord, string.
Tierce. Fr. tierce, from Lat. tertius, third.
Tiff.—Tift.—Tiffin. Used in several senses, all ultimately reducible to that of a whiff or draught of breath. Tiff, a sup or draught of drink.—Moor. Hence tiff, small beer. Tift, a small draught of liquor, or short fit of doing anything ;

Tiller. In Suffolk the handle of a spade is called a tiller. The ordinary sense of the word is the handle of the rudder, the bar by which it is worked. Perhaps from Du. tillen, to lift, to meddle with.
To Tiller. To send up a number of shoots from a root. Tillers are also the young trees left to stand when a wood is felled. AS. tilga, Du. telghe, telgher, a branch, shoot.—Kil. In Osnabruck telge is applied to a young oak.—Brem. Wtb. Pl.D. telgholt, tellholt, branchwood for burning or other purposes. Corrèze tudel, a germ, sprout; tudela, to sprout.
Tilt. ON. tjalld, a tent, a curtain; Du. telte, G. zelt, a tent; Sp. tolda, toldo, an awning. Lap. telte, a covering for a sledge; teltek, a sledge with a tilt; teltet, to spread.
To Tilt. 1. To joust, to ride at each other with blunt lances. To come full tilt against a person is to run against him with the entire force of the body. AS. tealtian, tealtrian, Exmoor tilt, to totter, vacillate. Tealde getrywth, faith wavers. Tealtiende, nutantes.—Ps. 108. 9.
The force of a significant syllable is often increased by the addition of an l without change of meaning, as in patter, palter; tatter, Pl.D. taller, rags; jot, jolt, to jog. So from totter is developed toller, still used in Northampton in the sense of jog, totter, move heavily and clumsily. The tottering bustle of a blundering trot.—Clare. Thence toll, a blow against a beam or the like.—Mrs Baker.
Ouertok hem, as tyd, tulte hem of sadeles Tyl uche prynce had his pere put to the grounde. Morris Allit. Poems, B. 1213.—struck or drove them from their saddles. In another poem, in the same volume, it is said that Jona was no sooner out-tulde (pitched overboard) than the tempest ceased.
2. To tilt up, to strike up a thing so as to set it slanting.
Timber. Goth. timrjan, timbrjan, to build. G. zimmer, formerly the stuff or matter of which anything was made, especially building materials. Skaffelosa zimber, informis materia. In Henneberg zimmer is used for a beam. It was then used for a building, and finally a chamber. Du. timmer, fabrica, contig-natio, et materia, et tignum.—Kil.
Timbrel. Sp. tambor, a drum; tam-boril, a tabour or kind of small drum; tamboritillo, a small drum for children; timbal, a kettle-drum. Ptg. tamboril, tambourine, little drum. See Tabour.
Time. Time like tide seems to signify happening, the course of events. ON. tima. Da. time, to happen, to befall; timask, to succeed; timi, time; timadagr, a lucky day; timalaus, unlucky. Goth. gatiman, g. ziemen, geziemen, to be fit or becoming, show a secondary sense analogous to that of OE. fall, to be suitable to. It nothing falls to thee To make fair semblant where thou mayst blame. R. R.
—it is not allotted to thee; it does not fall to thy lot.
To have no time for something is a corruption from room, leisure.
And, or the tothyr had toyme to tak His swerd, the king sic swak him gaiff That he the hede till the harnys claiff. Bruce iv. 643.
Timid. Lat. timeo, to be afraid.
Tin. ON. tin, G. zinn, Lat. stannum.
-tinct. -tinguish. — Extinguish.—Distinguish. Lat. stinguo, exstinguo, extinguo, -tinctum, to put out, to quench; distinguo, to know apart, to separate by marks. The foregoing forms are not to be explained from Lat. tingo, tinguo, to dip, sprinkle, dye, but from the root, stag, stig, signifying stick, prick, shown in Gr. στίζω, to prick; στικτός, pricked, marked, spotted; διαστίζω, to distinguish by a mark, to spot; and in Lat. stigo, instigo, to prick or urge on. The nasalised form of the root is seen in E. sting, in slang, a pole, and in stanch, stench, to stop the flow of liquid, to quench or stop the action of fire. Exstinguo then is utterly to stop, and the radical identity of the verb with E. stanch is well illustrated by It. ristagnar, to stanch or stop the flow of blood, compared with Lat. restinguere, to quench.
Tincture.—Tinge.—Tint. Lat. tingo, tinctum, to dip, stain, dye. Fr. taindre, teindre, pple. teint, to dye or colour; teint, a tint or colour. The E. tinge corresponds to Prov. tencha, tinge, colour; tenchar. It. tingere. The radical sense is shown in Gr. τέγγω, to wet, moisten, bedew, then to dye or stain. See Dew, Daggle.
Tinder. The idea of glittering or sparkling is commonly expressed by the figure of a crackling or tinkling sound. Thus E. glitter may be compared with Da. knittre, to rattle, crackle, and E. glister, glisten, or Da. gnistre, to sparkle, with knistre, to crackle. On the same principle, Du. tintelen, primarily to tinkle or tingle, in a secondary sense is to twinkle or sparkle, and thence tintel, tontel, tondel, tonder, tinder, the recipient of sparks. To tinkle a candle was used in Northampton, according to Kennet, in the sense of lighting. Sw. tindra, to sparkle; tunder, tinder. ON. tyndra, to sparkle; tendra, tandra, to light a fire, a candle; tundra, to blaze; tundr, tinder. N. tendra, tende, to light; tendring, a setting fire to, a beginning to shine; maanetendring, the new moon. G. zünden, to kindle, set fire to; zunder, zundel, OFr. tondres, tinder.

Tine. The point of a fork, of a deer's horn. ON. tindr, N. tind, the tooth of a comb, a rake, a harrow, sharp point of a mountain. ON. tonn, Da. tand, a tooth. N. tindut, Da. tandet, toothed.

Tingle.—Tinkle. The sound of a small bell is represented in different dialects by the syllables tin, ting, tink, tang, twang. Thus Melchiori, Vocab. Bresc., has tinch-tinch, onomatopoeia for the sound of bells. Ting-tang, the saint's bell; to tang, to sound as a bell; to ting, to ring.—Hal. Du. tinghe-tanghen, tintinare.—Kil. Lat. tinnire, tintinare, to ring; tintinnabulum, a bell; tintinnaculus, tinkling, clinking. Fr. tinier, to ting, ring, tingle; tinion, the ting of a bell, the burthen of a song; tintouin, a ringing, singing or tingling in the head, about the ears; tintillant, tinging, tingling, resounding.—Cot. Du. tintelen was formerly used in the sense of tinkle, but has now the metaphorical senses of sparkle or tingle, as the fingers with cold. In the original sense it represents a succession of brisk impressions upon the ear; and is then applied to a succession of analogous impressions on the eye or the sense of touch. Hesse zingern, zingeln, to tingle with cold.

Tinker.—Tinkler. A mender of pots and pans, from the clinking sound of his working. A tinker, or tinkeler.—Baret. 1580. Tynkynge, the sowndyng of metalls when they be strycken together, tintin.—Palsgr. For a like reason a dealer in hardware is in Fr. quincailler, or in the N. of France clincailleux.—Hécart. Cliquaille, clinquaille, quincaillerie, chinks, coin; quinquailler, old iron, small iron ware; clinquillerie, a chinking or clinking of money, or of many pans and skellets together.—Cot. So also G. klempern, Pl.D. klimpern, to tinkle, to make a tinkling noise with hammers as tinkers and tinmen, to play ill on a stringed instrument; Henneberg klemperer, a tinker. On the Lower Rhine he is called spängler, from Lith. spengti, to ring, to sound.

Tinsel. Cotgrave explains Fr. brocatel as tinsel or thin cloth of gold. From OFr. estincelles, sparkling, spangles—Roquef.; estincelle, a spark, sparkle. It will be observed that spangle also properly signifies sparkle. Fr. estincelle is explained from Lat. scintilla, by inversion of the c and t. But it may perhaps, on the principle indicated under Tinder, be derived from a form corresponding to E. tinkle, twinkle, or Du. tintelen, to tinkle, then to sparkle. The Lat. scintilla itself might be explained from a form like Da. skingre, to ring, clang, resound.

Tiny. Small. When we wish to express something very small we make the voice pipy, and say a little tee-eeny thing, a teeny-weeny thing, showing that the force of the expression lies in the narrow vowel ee, the only one that can be pronounced when the vocal orifice is contracted to the utmost limit. The sense of diminution is expressed by the contraction of the volume of sound. The rhyming form teeny-weeny may indicate a connection with Du. weynig, G. wenig, little, small, few. The Galla has tina, little.

Tip. The change of the broad vowel a or o to the narrow i is often used to indicate diminution of action or of size. So from knob, a round broad projection, we pass to nib, a fine and pointed one, and from ON. toppr, Da. top, top, summit, also as G. zopf, a tuft of hair, to Du. tip, tipken, tip, point; G. zipfel, a tip, corner, lappet. The light vowel modifies the sense of the verb in the same way as that of the noun. Hence from Bav. toppen, to knock, to beat as the heart, Sp. topar, to butt or strike with the head, to run or strike against, may be explained E. tip, applied to a light, quick movement; to tip one a wink; to tip or slip a present of money into the hand; to tip up, tip over.

Tippet. Properly, like G. zipfel, the tip or lappet of a garment. The tip of the hood was called in Mid. Lat. liripipium, and was greatly lengthened out so as to admit of being wrapped round the head or the neck, and thence the name of tippet was given to a wrapper round the neck. Du. timp, a tip or corner, also a wrapper for the neck, fascia collum ambiens et a frigore cervicem defendens, vulgo collipendium.—Kil. Leripipium, zippe, kogel-zipp, kappen-zipffel, timpe van der kogelen; temp van een kaproen.—Dief. Supp. 'As the monks had their cowles, caprons or whodes, and their botes, so had they then their long typpettes, their prestes cappes.'—Bale in R. Cum liripipiis ad modum cordarum circa caput advolutis.—Knyghton in Duc. Liripipium sive timpam retro latam duplicem et oblongam habens per dorsum dependentem.—Longa tunica vestitus, nigro caputio, cum grandi liripipio collo indutus.—Duc. It was perhaps this variety in the mode of wearing the tippet that led to the phrase of turning his tippet in the sense of a total change of conduct.
To Tipple. Bavarian zipfel, zipfelein, a tip or corner of anything, is used for a bit, a small portion. Kein zipfel, not a bit; zipfelweis, in small portions; zipfeln, zipfelen, to take, give, eat, drink, &c., in small portions. The cow zipfelt when she lets her milk go in driblets; Hesse verzippeln, to sprinkle, scatter in small portions. So W. tic, ticyn, a particle, a little bit; ticial, to produce small particles or drops, to drain the last drops in milking; Hp, tipyn, a small particle. E. dial. tip, a draught of liquor. To tipple then would be to drink in small portions, to be continually drinking. Pl.D. tippl, a dot, spot, fine drop.—Danneil. N. tippa, to drip; tipla, to drip slowly, to sip.
Tipsy. Swab. dapps, tapps, diebes, dipps, Swiss tips, a fuddling with drink; tipseln, to fuddle oneself; betipst, tipsy. From these forms it would appear that we cannot explain the word as unsteady, apt to tip over, as we should be inclined to do if we had only the E. word.
Tire. Tire of a wheel, the tier or rim of iron that ties or binds the fellies together.
* To Tire. 1. OE. terwyn or make wery, lasso, fatigo; terwyd, lassatus, fatigatus.—Pr. Pm. AS. tirian, tirigan, tyrwian, to vex, irritate, provoke, oppress. Hine mid wurdum tirigdon, illum verbis irritaverunt. Me tyrath mine eagan, me irritant mei oculi, lippio.—Elfr. Gr. Hig me tirigdon. Illi provocaverunt.—Deut. 32. 21. Mid ungilde tyrwigende waes, was vexing with unjust tribute.—Chr. 1100. Du. tergen, Da. targe, G. zergen, to irritate; Da. iirre, to tease, to worry.
The primary sense would seem to be to provoke, irritate, harass, whence the notion of weariness naturally follows. A person long provoked is at last tired out, he can bear it no longer. We speak of being harassed with business, tired, worn out. See To Tear.
2. To tire, to feed upon (especially of birds of prey), is a totally different word from the foregoing.
The foule that hight vultour, that eateth the stomake of Tityus is so fulfylled of his songe that it nill eaten ne tyren no more.—Chaucer, Boeth. Sw. tära, to gnaw, eat, consume; tära på, to prey upon, consume, live upon. PL.D. teren, G. zehren, to consume; OHG. zeran, Goth. tairan, AS. teran, to tear; zerjan, to consume. See To Tear.
3. To tire, to dress. See Attire.

Tissue. Fr. tissu; tisser, OFr. tissir and tistre, Lat. texere, to weave. See Texture.
Tit.—Tittle. Henneb. tüttele, a little bit. See Tot.
Tithe. AS. teothe, tenth; teothian, to tithe or take a tenth. Fris. tegotha, tienda, tenth. Tithes are called tiends in Scotland.
Title. Lat. titulus, an inscription, explanatory mark.
To Titter. Swiss fitzern, kitzern, Hanneberg kittern, kekkern, to giggle, titter. Titter, like giggle, represents a succession of sharp thin sounds, while tatter, with the broad vowel, expresses a succession of opener sounds. Bav. tattern, OE. tatter (Pr. Pm.), to chatter, tattle, gabble. Du. tateren, to make a rattling sound, to stammer, stutter.
And as the sense is transferred from sound to movement in Bav. tattern, to shiver, tremble, so we have provincially to titter, to see-saw, to tremble, ON. titra, G. zittern, to tremble, shiver. In like manner Bav. gigken, gigkezen, to make broken sounds, to stutter or giggle, leads to gigkeln, to tremble, twitch, quiver, corresponding to E. kickle, fickle, tottering, unsteady. See To Totter.
To.—Too. Du. toe, G. zu, to. Too hot, G. zu heiss, is hot in addition to [what is fitting].
Toad. The name of the toad is generally taken from the habit of the animal of puffing itself up with wind. So Gr. φυσάω, to blow, to swell; φύσαλος, a toad. Fr. bouffer, to puff, blow, swell up; Lat. bufo, a toad. Magy. bufa, a toad, a man with swollen cheeks. In like manner Da. tudse, Ditmarsh tutze, a toad, are from ON. tútna, to swell, Somerset tote, to bulge out. In South Danish trute is to project the lips, to strut like full pockets, and trutz, a toad.
Toadeater. Originally the assistant to a mountebank.
Be the most scorned Jackpudding of the pack, And turn toad-eater to some foreign quack.
Satire on an ignorant quack, by Thomas Brown.
The same author, in a collection of letters from dead persons, puts the following passage into the mouth of Joseph Haines, a celebrated mountebank and fortune-teller, who died in 1701. 'I intend to build a stage, and set up my old trade of fortune-telling, and as I shall have occasion for some understrapper to draw teeth for me or to be my toad-eater on the stage, &c.'—N. & Q., Febr. 15, 1862.
The word was explained as 'a metaphor from a mountebank's boy eating toads in order to show his master's skill in expel-ling poison.'—Daniel Simple, by Sarah Fielding, 1744. But this is doubtless an imaginary explanation. A more rational suggestion is that of Mr Keightley's in N. & Q., that swallowing toads is a version of Fr. avaler des couleuvres, which signifies putting up with all sorts of indignities without showing resentment. Thus a toad-eater would be a souffredouleur.

Toast. 1. Roasted bread. It. tostare, to toast or parch. Lat. torrere, tostum, to roast.
2. A pledge in drinking. The German cry when topers pledge each other, knock-ing their glasses together, is stoss an ! of which it is not improbable that the E. term is a corruption, as carouse from gar aus.

Tod. A bush, a bunch of anything fibrous, as of hay. A tod of wool is 28lb. ON. todda, a flock or ball of wool ; toddi, a lump of food. G. zote, provincially zode (Deutsch. Mundart. I. 408), a lock or flock of wool or hair, a rag or tatter. See Dud. Da. tot, a bunch of flax, &c. Pl.D. tadde, tadder, taddel, a rag.

To Toddle. To walk imperfectly like a child, with alternate impulses. G. zot-teln. is used in exactly the same sense. Daher zotteln, or, gezottelt kommen, to come reeling or staggering along, to be trotting along.—Küttn. Zotten, zotteln (contemptuously), to go.—Schm. Er zottelt nach so gut er kann.—Sanders. Bav. zottern, to dangle, indicates the characteristic feature of the idea. Pl.D. zaddel, a rag, tatter (dangling or flutter-ing in the wind).—Danneil. See Tassel, Totter.

Toe. ON. tá, AS. ta, Du. teen, Pl.D. taan, toon. The toes seem to be regarded as the twigs or branches of the foot. ON. teina, a shoot ; teinn, a rod ; Du. teen, an osier, a twig ; AS. tán, a twig, sprout, shoot. N. tein, a shoot, rod, stick. The mistletoe or mistle shrub is in ON. mistil-teinn.

Toft. A place where a messuage once stood, that is fallen and pulled down.—B. Da. tomt, site of a building ; toft, enclosed field close to a farmhouse; tom, empty. Sw. tomt, place for building, site of a house, empty space. N. tuft, toft, tomt, site of a house, place where a house has stood.

Together. See Gather.

Toil. Du. tuylen, teulen, to till the ground, to work, labour ; tuyl, agriculture, work, toil. See Till.

Toil.—2. Toilet. The toils in hunt-ing were nets set up to enclose the game. Fr. toiles, toils, or a hay to inclose or en-tangle wild beasts in.—Cot. Toile, cloth, from Lat. tela, a web.

Toilette was a packing or wrapping cloth, the cloth that covered a dressing-table, whence in E. it is applied to the dressing-table itself.

Toise. Fr. toise, a fathom. From Lat. tensus. It. teso, stretched. Mid.Lat. tensa, tesa, extension, width of the stretch-ed arms, and thence Fr. toise, as mois from mensis, poids from pensum.—Scheler.

Token. Goth. taikns, G. zeichen, OSax. tekan, Bohem. ceych, a mark, a brand. Lith. czekis, a mark, burnt in or otherwise imprinted ; czekoti, to mark. Lap. tsekke, a nick or notch, thence the number ten ; tsekkestet, to notch ; märkeb tsekkeset, to cut in a mark ; tsekkot, to cut, to desig-nate, to mark out for or appoint.

Tolerate.—Tolerable. Lat. tolero, to sustain, endure. Goth. thulan, ON. thola, AS. tholian, to thole, endure, suffer.

* Toll. Gr. τέλος, consummation, magistracy, government ; that which is paid for state purposes, tax, duty, toll; τελώνης, a collector of tolls ; τελώνιον, Lat. telonium, a toll-house. Hence Mid.Lat. telon, telonium, tolonium, OFr. tolin, tol-lin, tollien, tonlien, ON. tollr, G. zoll, E. toll.

To Toll. Tollyñ or mevyn' or steryñ' to done a dede, incito, provoco, excito.—Pr. Pm.
With empty hand may no man hawkes tulle :. Lo here our silver redy for to spend.—Chaucer.
' Attirer, to draw or bring to, to toll or lead on, to entice, allure unto.'—Cot.
' The fault of the escape is attributable to the hoggishness of the man who tolled the negroes into Dover.'—American news-paper, 1857.
To toll the bells is when they ring slowly to invite the people into church.

Tomb. Gr. τύμβος, place where a dead body was burnt, mound of earth over the ashes, tomb, grave. Mid.Lat. tomba, Fr. tombe, tombeau.

Tome. Fr. tome, Lat. tomus, a volume; Gr. τόμος, a cut, a part, a volume, from τέμνω, to cut.

Ton.—Tun. Lat. tina, a wine-vessel; Fr. tine, a tub ; tonne, a barrel.

Tone.—Tonic. Gr. τείνω, to stretch, strain, whence τόνος, a strain, stretching, the thing stretched, a cord, and (as the sound of a cord rises in tone in proportion to the strain) a raising of the voice, a musical tone, note.

Tongs. ON. taung, tōng, Sw. tång, Du. tanghe, G. zange, tongs. An implement consisting of two stangs or rods. ON. tōng (as stong), a rod, bar, stick, the bar by which the load of a sledge is tightened.—Fritzner.
Tongue. Goth. tuggo, ON. tunga, G. zunge, Gael. teanga, OLat. dingua, Lat. lingua.
Tonsure. Lat. tondeo, tonsum, to clip, shear.
Tool. ON. tōl. Ihre compares Lat. telum, a weapon.
To Toot. Du. tuyten, toeten, to sound a horn, to whisper in the ears; OE. totte, to whisper; ON. thjota. Da. tude, to sound, resound as the wind, waves, music.
Tooth. Goth. tunthus, OHG. zand, G. zahn, Sanscr. dantas, Gr. ὀδούς, ὀδόντος, Lat. dens, dentis, W. dant.
Top. I. ON. toppr, the top or summit, anything that runs up to a point, a tuft; tretoppr, tree-top. Da. topsukker, loaf-sugar; topmaal, heaped measure. Pl.D. topp, Du. top, tsop, summit, top. W. twb, a round lump.
Words signifying strike or knock are often applied to the end of a thing, as the part with which the blow is given; or to a projection or part that strikes out from the surrounding surface, then to a bunch or lump. In this way It. botta, a blow or stroke, is related to Fr. botte de foin, a bunch of hay; and Pl.D. bunsen, to strike, to E. bunch. To bob is to make an abrupt movement, to strike; and bob is a bunch or lump.
Now topp! represents the sound of striking hands or concluding a bargain (see Tope). It. toppa-toppa! sound of knocking at a door.—Diz. Parmeggiano, in v. tac-tac. Sp. topar, to knock or strike against; tope, the striking of one thing against another, butt end of a plank, top or summit.
2. Du. top, G. topf, kreiseltopf, a spinning top. The radical idea is a rounded summit, and the name often includes the notion of something tapering. Sw. sockertopp, a sugar-loaf; N. topp, tapp, a cork; toppa, a bung; G. zapfen, a bung or stopple, an icicle, a fircone; Fr. toupin, toupon, a stopper for a bottle; toupil, toupillon, a casting-top; toupillonet, a very small top or stopple.—Cot.
To Tope. Properly to pledge one in drinking, to knock the glasses together before drinking them off, then to have a drinking-bout, to drink in excess. Bav. toppen, Sp. topar, to knock. In Sw. and Pl.D. the exclamation topp!, in Fr. tope!, represents striking hands on the conclusion of a bargain, whence toper, to accept a proposition, to agree to. And according to Florio the same exclamation was used for the acceptance of a pledge in drinking, where the knocking of glasses stands instead of the striking of hands at a bargain. * Topa! a word among dicers, as much as to say, I hold it, done, throw! also by good fellows when they are drinking; 'I'll pledge you.' The foregoing explanation would make the E. tope the exact equivalent of Fr. choquer, choquailler, to quaff, carouse, tipple—Cot., choquer les verres, to knock glasses.
Topic.—Topography. Gr. τόπος, a place, a topic, a common-place in Rhetoric; τοπικός, concerning place, concerning τόποι or common-places.
Topsyturvy. From topside t'other way. It is written topst'-to'erway in Searches' 'Light of Nature.'
Torch. It. torcia, torchia, Fr. torche, a torch, also the wreathed clout, wisp, or wad of straw laid by wenches between their heads and the things they carry on them.—Cot. From It. torcere, to twist, because the torch was made of a twisted wreath of tow or the like.
Torment.—Torture. Lat. torqueo, tortum, to twist, wrench, rack.
Torpedo.—Torpid.—Torpor. Lat. torpeo, to be benumbed, to be dull and drowsy.
Torrent.—Torrid. Lat. torreo, to roast, scorch, dry up with heat. Hence torrens, a stream that runs only in the winter and dries up in summer.
-tort.—Torsion. Lat. torqueo, torsi, tortum, to twist, wrench. As in Distort, Contortion, &c. Retort, a close chemical vessel with the mouth bent downwards.
* Tortoise. It. tartaruga, Sp. tortuga, Fr. tortue, Prov. tortesa. From Lat. tortus, twisted.
Be not like the crane or the tortu; for they are like the crane and the turtu that turnithe her hede and fases bacward, and lokithe ouer the shuldre.—Knight of Latour, c. xi.
* To Toss. The radical image is probably shown in N. tossa, to strew, to scatter. To toss hay is to spread it in small portions, to throw it here and there. Hesse zisseln, to spread hay, either with the hand or with rakes. See To Ted. Auszisseln, to shake the crums from a table-cloth. Bav. zosselweis, in scattered portions. Banff toosht, an untidy bundle of rags, straw, &c.; to toosht, to dash hither and thither. Fallersleben tost, tassel, tuft of hair. E. dial. tisty-tosty, a bunch of cowslips tied up and used to toss to and fro for amusement.—Jennings. See Tassel, Tatter.

Tot.—Tit. The syllables tat, tot, tit, are used in the formation of words signifying broken sound, as in Du. tateren, toteren, to sound like a trumpet, to stammer, G. tottern, todern, to totter in speaking, to tattle, or twattle with stuttering (Ludwig.), Bav. tattern, to chatter, OE. tateryn, jangelyn, chateryn, jaberyn (Pr. Pm.), E. dial. tutter, to stutter; titter, to giggle. The radical element by itself signifies a slight sound in N. tot, a murmur; It. ni totto ni motto, not a syllable. Sc. tutmute, a low muttering; Banff teet, the smallest sound, smallest word, 'Nae ae teet cam o's hehd.' Then, as in so many other cases, the syllables representing sound are transferred to the sense of bodily action and bodily substance. Hence Bav. tattern, to tremble; Du. touteren, to palpitate, tremble, see-saw; E. totter, to move unsteadily; titter, to tremble, to see-saw (Hal.); ON. titra, to shiver; Lat. titillo, E. dial. tittle, to tickle, to excite by slight touches; Hampsh. tat, to touch lightly. To tot about, to move with short steps, as a child attempting to walk, or a feeble old person.—Mrs Baker. Totty, unsteady, dizzy, reeling. To tot a thing down in the margin is to mark it with a slight touch of the pen, as from jot, to jog, we speak of jotting a thing down on paper. And as jot is transferred from the sense of a short abrupt movement to that of a small quantity, so tot is applied to anything small. A child is called a pretty little tot. In Lancash. it signifies a tuft or brush. Da. tot, Sc. tait, a flock of wool, flax, &c. Fr. tatin, a small portion; It. tozzo, a lump or bit. E. dial. totty, small.

The change of the vowel from a or o to i marks diminution, in tittle, the mark of a touch, or the least portion of anything; tit, anything small of its kind, a little horse, a little girl, a little bird. A titlark is a small kind of lark; titmouse (Du. mossche, a sparrow, G. meise, a small bird), or tomtit, a very small bird; titfaggots, small short faggots. ON. tita, 'a small bird,' an object small of its kind. E. dial. titty-totty, titty, diminutive, tiny.—Hal. On the same principle It. zito, zita, a boy, a girl, and E. chit, must be explained from It. zitto, Fr. chut, properly a slight sound, thence used with ellipse of the negative in the sense of hush! Non fare zitto, not to utter a sound; chuchoter, to mutter.

TOUT Total. Lat. totus, whole, entire.

To Totter. Toteron' or waveron', vacillo.—Pr. Pm. Titter-totter, a play for childre, balenchoeres.—Palsgr. Oscillum (a swing), a totoure.—Med.Gr. in Pr. Pm. Tatter or totter represent in the first instance broken sound, then broken movement, doing anything by broken impulses, stammering or stuttering, tottering or moving in a vacillating way, moving to and fro. G. tatterata! represents the sound of the trumpet.—Sanders in v. Tusch. Du. tateren, horribili sonitu taratantara dicere instar tubae; titubare, balbutire, imperfecte loqui; maculare, inepte aliquid facere.—Kil. Banff tooter, to tattle, babble, walk with a weak faltering step, work in a weak trifling manner. Du. touteren, to oscillate, to swing. E. dial. tutter, to stutter.

Touch. Fr. toucher, OFr. toquer, to knock, hit, touch.—Roquef. It. ticchetocche represents the sound of knocking at a door; Prov. toc, blow; Sp. tocar, to knock at a door, to ring bells, to play on a musical instrument, to reach with the hand, to touch. It. tocco, a knock, stroke, hit, stroke of a clock; toccare, to hit, join close to, to touch.

Tough. AS. toh, Du. taai, G. zähe, what stands pulling, from AS. teon (ptcple togen), Pl.D. teen, togen, G. Ziehen, to pull, to draw. Boh. tahati, to draw; tahowity tough.

Tour. Fr. tour, a turn.

Tournament. A combat in an enclosed space, from It. torneare, attorneare, to surround. 'Fece attorneare sua huoste con buone catene de fierro con pali di fierro molto spessi ficcati in terra. Questo attorniamento fu fatto alla rotonna a modo di un fierro da cavallo.'—Fragm. Hist. Rom. in Muratori, vol. iii., speaking of the preparations for the battle of Crecy.

To Touse.—Touzle. G. zausen, Pl.D. tuseln, to pull or hale about, to tug, tear by snatches, pull by the hair, to touse wool; sich zausen, to tustle, fight. To touse wool is to pull the flocks to pieces and lay them together again. The proper meaning is to pull to pieces. 'Recipe brawne of capons or of hennys—and towse them small.'—Babees Book, p. 53. E. dial. tuz, tust, a bunch of wool or hair. See To Tease.

To Tout.—Tote. To look, to peep. Than toted I in at a taverne and there I aspyde Two frere Carmes.—P. P. Creed. Tote hylle or hey place of lokynge, conspicillum, specula.—Pr. Pm. His ton toteden out—P. P. : his toes peeped forth.

A touter is one who looks out for custom. To tote, in Somerset, is to bulge out, and probably the radical meaning of the word may be to stick out. Totodun ut tha heafdu, eminebant capita.—Past. 16. 5. ON. tota, a snout ; túta, anything stick-ing out ; túteygdr, having prominent eyes ; tútna, to swell. E. dial tut-mouthed, having a projecting jaw. Du. tuyte, the nave of a wheel ; tuytmuyl, a projecting mouth ; tuytpot, a pot with a spout ; tuytschoenen, toteschoenen, beaked shoes ; tote, a snout ; de tote setten, to make a snout (in nursery language), to project the lips in ill temper. From the interjection tut! expressive of displeasure, as from trut! tush! tut! fy man! (Cot.), another form of the same interjection ultimately representing a blurt with the lips, are formed Da. dial, trutte, to stick out the lips, to bulge as full pockets ; trutt, a spout.—Molbech. Sw. dial, truta, to pout ; trutas, to be out of temper ; trut, a mouth, snout, spout.

Tow. Fris. touw.—Kil. ON. tog, the long hairs or coarse shaggy part of the fleece; tog-thrædr, thread spun of such wool. From ON. toga, to draw, hale, drag : what is drawn out in combing or dressing the wool, as E. tow is the refuse drawn out in dressing flax. The name of tow would thus be precisely synonymous with oakam or ockam, AS. æcembi, what is combed out.

To Tow. Fr. touer, to hale a vessel by a rope. Du. toghen, ON. toga, to drag or pull ; tog, drag or pull. Hafa hest i togi : to lead a horse with a string behind one, to have a horse in tow. To take a ship in tow then is to take it in drag. ON. tog is also a cable, a fishing-line ; the means by which the ship pulls at the anchor, or by which the fish is drawn out of water. Du. touw. Da. toug, a cable, rope. Pl.D. tog, draught, stroke, trick. Tog is the root of Goth, tiuhan, G. ziehen (gezogen), AS. teon, teohan (togen), Pl.D. teen, togen, to draw.

Towel. It. tovaglia, a tablecloth, OFr. touaille, Du. dwaele, dwaal, a towel ; dweil, a clout, a swab ; dwaen, dwaeden, dwaegen, to wipe, wash ; Goth, twahan, AS. thwean, ON. thvá, Da. toe, to wash.

Tower. W. twr, a tower, a heap or pile. Lat. turris, Fr. tour, a tower. An abrupt peaked hill is called tor in Devon-shire. Gael, torr, a steep hill, mound, heap, tower, and as a verb, to heap up.

Town. Properly an enclosure, en-closed place, then farm, dwelling, village, town. AS. wyrt-tun, a garden for worts.

Pl.D. tuun, a fence, hedge, an enclosed place, garden ; G. zaun, a hedge. AS. tynan, to enclose, hedge, shut. 'And ase the eie openeth and tuneth.'—Ancren Riwle, p. 94. Commonly referred to Goth, tain, G. zain, zein, AS. tán, a rod or shoot, as the simplest material of a hedge. Bav. zain, zainen, a hurdle, wattle, basket ; zain-reusen, wattled baskets for taking fish.

-toxic- Lat. toxicum, Gr. τοξικον, poison.

Toy. An ellipse for play-toy, imple-ments of play, as G. spielzeug, spielsachen, toys. Zeug, Pl.D. tüg, Sw. tyg. Da. toi, materials, stuff, implements. Pl.D. kla-ter-tüg, rattle-traps ; jungens un derens tüg, a collection of youths and girls. G. liederliches zeug, paltry stuff ; lächer-liches zeug, nonsense. In like manner daff-toy (Sc. daff, foolish, trifling) was formerly used in the sense of a trifle. The gentlewoman neither liked gown nor petti-coat so well as some little bunch of rubies or some such daff-toy. I mean to give her Majesty two pairs of silk-stockings lined with plush if London afford me not more daff-toy I like better.—Letter of Arabella Stewart in N. & Q., Dec. 1860. Fine toys, mignotises ; slender toys, menu-sailles, menuailles.—Sherwood.

To Toy. To handle amorously. OE. togge, properly to tug, to pull about. Mid wouhinge, mid iogginge, with wooing, with toying.—Ancren Riwle, 53. 6. Ha tollith toggederes ant toggith, they fondle together and toy.—St Marherete in E. E. Text Society.

Trace. It. traccia, Fr. trace, a trace, point of the foot, footstep, also a path or tract.—Cot. Sp. traza, first sketch or draught, trace, outline. From trahere, through the participial form tractus, trac-tio.—Diez. It will be observed that Sp. rastra signifies both the act of dragging along and a track or mark left on the ground. To trail is to drag along, and trail in N. America is the trace or mark where a person has passed.

Traces. Trayce, horsys harneys, traxus, restis, trahale.—Pr. Pm. Fr. traict, a teame-trace or trait.—Cot. From Lat. tractus, draught ; cheval de trait, a draught-horse.

Track. Fr. trac, a track, tract or trace, a beaten way or path, also a trade or course.—Cot. Our first inclination is to unite the word with tract or trace, or to derive it from G. trecken, to drag. The Prov. has trah, trag, trai, in the sense of draught, course. 'Lo dreg trai:' the right direction.

But the primary meaning seems to be that given by Palsgrave: step, a print of one's foot, trac. And the true explanation of the word I believe to be that it is a parallel form with G. trapp, representing the sound of the footfall, and thence signifying a footprint.—Danneil. Swiss Rom. trac, a trap-door. Piedm. trich—track represents the sound made by one who clatters along in clogs or wooden shoes. Roquefort explains trac as noise, the blow of a lance, the pace of a mule or horse. Tracas, much trotting or hurrying up and down.—Cot. Castrais traquet-traquet, tripping, going off by little steps. Cat. trac, Sp. traque, a crack, report of an explosion. Limosin fa lo traco, to make a beaten path in snow.
It is singular that there is yet another route by which we are brought to the same form. From ON. troða, to tread, is the frequentative traðka, and thence N. trakka, to trample, stamp; trakk, treading, continually going to and fro.
-tract.—Traction. Lat. traho, tractum, to draw, drag. As in Abstract, Contract, Retract, Subtract, &c.
Tractable. See Treat.
Trade. The proper meaning of the word is a trodden way, a beaten path or course, and thence metaphorically a way of life. A tradesman is one who follows a special way of life in opposition to the husbandmen who constituted the great bulk of the community. The trade-winds are winds which hold a certain trade or course.
Wyth wind at will the trad held thai, And in England com rycht swyth. Wynton. vi. 20, 55.
Tho would I seek for queen-apples unripe To give my Rosalind, and in summer shade Dight gawdy girlonds was my common trade To crown her golden locks. Shepherd's Calendar.
Pl.D. trade, trahe, wagentrahe, a waggon-rut.—Adelung in v. geleise. ON. troð, treading. In the sense of commerce, however, it is probable that trade, a way of life, has been confounded with Sp. trato, treatment, intercourse, communication, trade, traffic, commerce; tratar, to treat of a subject, to confer, to trade or traffic. See Treat. The name of traite is specially given in French to the trade of the African coast; la traite des noirs, the slave trade.
Tradition. Lat. trado (trans, across and do), traditum, to hand over, to transmit.
Traffic. Sp. trafagár, traficar, to traffic, also to travel or make journeys; trafago, traffic, a careful management of affairs; tráfagon, active, industrious, meddlesome. Castrais trafega, to stir, to mix (brouiller), to bustle; trafegous, meddlesome, troublesome.
The word seems to signify active employment, from Limousin trofi, trafl, noise, disturbance, quarrel; then business, commerce, traffic. ' Lei oou fa un fier trofi: ' they have made a fine racket. ' Oven oougu doous trofi ensemble: ' we have had some rows together. Trofiga, to traffic. Swiss Rom. traffi, disturbance, noise, business. Languedoc tráfí, tracas, trouble, désordre, disturbance, trouble. Lou tráfí d'un oustaou, the trouble of a household; trafica, to bustle, to be busy, to frequent a place. Like many of the words of the S. of France it has probably a Celtic origin, W. trafu, to stir, to agitate; trafod, a stirring, turning about, bustle, intermeddling, labour, pains, trouble; trafodiaeth, transactions—Lewis; trafaes, stir, bustle, pains.—Jones.
Tragedy. Lat. tragœdia, from Gr. τραγῳδία; from τράγος, a goat, and ᾠδή, a poem for singing.
To Trail. To drag along. A frequentative from Lat. trahere, to draw. A trail, a sledge. ' Dogs—which they yoke together as we do oxen or horses to a sled or trail.'—Hackluyt, III. 37. Sp. trailla, a drag for levelling ground. Mid. Lat. traha, tracula, a sled or harrow. ' Trahas quas rustici tragulam vocant.—Papias in Duc. Trahale, a sledge.—Carp. It. tragula, a drag-net. Ptg. tralha, a fishing-net. Du. treylen, to tow a vessel, to drag it by a rope. Prov. tralh, traces, track.
Train, 1. It. traino, Sp. tragin, Prov. trahi, OFr. trahin, Fr. train, from Lat. trahere, to draw.
2. Sw. tran, G. thran, train-oil, oil that drips from the fat of whales. Pl.D. traon, tear, drop, train-oil; traonög, a dripping eye.—Danneil. OHG. trahan, gutta, lacryma.
Traitor. — Treason. — Treachery. From Lat. tradere, to give over, to betray, were formed It. tradire, Prov. trahir, trair, Fr. trahir, to betray, and It. traditore, OFr. trahitor, traitor, trahitre, Fr. traitre, a traitor. In the same way traditio became Fr. trahison, traison, E. treason. Another version of Lat. tradere gave Prov. trachar, to betray (quite distinct from Fr. tricher, to trick or cozen), and tracker, trachor, OE. trecheour, a betrayer, whence E. treachery. In a similar manner the Prov. had the two forms malfaitor and malfachor, a malefactor; afaitar and afachar, to train, to dress.
Tramel. It. tramaglio, Sp. trasmallo, Fr. tramail. Piedm. trimaj, a fishing-net of very fine materials of two or three layers, the middle one of narrow meshes and the outside ones of very wide meshes. The fish strikes against the narrow meshes of the middle net and drives a portion of it through one of the wide meshes on the opposite side, where it is entangled in a kind of pocket. Hence the name, from trans maculam, through the mesh. The Sp. form of the word, trasmallo, is hardly compatible with the ordinary explanation from the threefold constitution of the net.
To Tramp.—Trample. From a na-salised form of G. trapp ! trapp ! repre-senting the sound of the footfall. Du. trappen, trappelen, Sw. trampa, to tread, to trample.
Trance. It. transire, transitare, to pass over; by met. to fall into a swoon, or to yield and give up the ghost; transito, a passage over, also a dead trance or the instant of giving up the ghost.—Fl. Fr. transi, fallen into a transe or swoon, whose heart, sense, or vital spirits fail him; astonied, appalled, half dead. Transi de froid, benummed with cold. Transe, extreme fear or anxiety of mind; a trance or swoon.—Cot. Sp. transito, passage to a better life, death; transido, languishing, dying of inanition.
Tranquil. Lat. tranquillus.
Trans-. Tra-. Lat. trans, across, beyond.
Transept. Lat. trans, across, and septum, an enclosure.
Transom.—Transommer. A cross beam, horizontal division in a window. Fr. sommier, a sumpter-horse, also the piece of timber called a summer, a truss-ing hoop on a cask.—Cot.
Trap. It. trappa, trappola, a trap; trappa is also a trap-door, a falling door: Fr. attraper, to catch. From the sharp sound of the falling door represented by the syllable trap ! which is in G. used to imitate the sound of the footfall.
Trap-rock. A name given in Geology to an igneous rock which often sends out dykes into the fissures of more modern strata, and these being found at different levels on the two sides of the dyke have the appearance of having been dislocated by the intrusion of the dyke. Now strata so dislocated are said by the miners to trap up or trap down (using trap in the sense of a sudden fall or sudden move-ment) according as they appear at a higher or lower level on the other side of the dyke. Hence the dyke causing such a dislocation would seem to have been called a trapdyke, and thence the name of trap transferred to the rock of which it was composed. See Account of the strata of a district in Somersetshire, Phil. Trans. 1719.
To Trape.—Traipse. To trail along in an untidy manner. Trapes, a slattern, an idle sluttish woman. Probably from the notion of being drabbled or drapled in the mire. See Drabble, Draggle. Banff trype, to walk in a slovenly man-ner; traich (ch gutt.), to handle or work in a liquid or semiliquid substance, or in a lazy, dirty, disgusting manner, to go idly from place to place.
Trappings. To trap a horse was to dress him in housings. 'Mules trapped with silke and clothe of golde.'—Udal, Mark. 'Coursers trapped to the earth in cloth of gold.'—Berners, Froissart in R. Hence trappers or trappings were the ornamental housings of horses. The origin seems to be the representa-tion of the flapping of cloths by the syllable trap. Sp. gualdrapa, horsecloth, housing, tatter, rag hanging down from clothes; gualdrapear (of sails), to slap against the mast; trapo, rag, tatter, sails of a ship, cloth. Ptg. trape, syllable re-presenting the sound of a blow; trapear, (of sails), to flap against the masts; trapo, a rag.—Roquete.
Trash. Trash or trousse signified clippings of trees. Gret fur he made ther a night of wode and of sprai, And tresche ladde ther aboute that me wide sai.
Trouse is still used in Hereford for the trimmings of hedges.
Provided always that they be laid with green willow bastons, and for default thereof with vine-cuttings or such trousse, so that they lie half a foot thick.—Holland, Pliny. Faggots to be every stick of three foot in length—this to pre-vent the abuse of filling the middle part and ends with trash and short sticks.—Evelyn. See N. & Q., June 11, 1853.
N. tros, the sound of breaking; trosa, to make such a sound, to break to bits; tros, windfalls, broken branches in a wood, dry broken twigs; tros vid, light dry wood for burning. ON. tros, offal, rubbish; trosna, to break up, wear away. Castrais trasso, old worn-out things; uno trasso de capel, an old hat.
Travel. It. travaglio, Sp. trabajo, Prov. trabalh, trebalh, Fr. travail, pains, labour, work. The passage to the E. sense of travel has taken place in like manner in the case of G. arbeit, labour, which in Bavaria is used in the sense of travel. Uber welt arbaiten, to travel over the world.—Schmeller. I believe that the word signifies in the first instance rattle, noise; then agitation, movement; then trouble, torment, work. Bret, trabel, a rattle, clapper; Prov. trebalh, chatter. ' Non aug d'auzelhs trebalh :' I do not hear the chatter of birds. Trebalhar, to agitate, disturb, trouble, torment; trebalhos, turbulent, troublesome, quarrelsome. Castrais trebo, racket, noise at night; treba, to make a racket, to stir while others are in bed; treboula, to trouble or muddy water. w. traf, a stir, a strain; trafu, to stir, to agitate; trafel, that stirs or works, a press, a hatchel; trafael, extreme effort, trouble. See Trouble.

Traverse. Fr. travers, from Lat. transversus.

Travesty. Fr. travestir, Lat. trans and vestis, to change into other clothes.

Tray. Du. draag-bak, a hod for carrying mortar; draagen, to carry. The Du. d sometimes answers to an E. l, as in drollen, E. troll, to roll.—Kil.

Treachery. See Traitor.

Treacle. From its resemblance to the old confection called triacle, which was considered a sovereign remedy against poison, and was named from Mid.Gr. θηρίον, a viper, either because it was good against the bite of vipers, or because it was supposed to be made of viper's flesh; θηριακή, Mid.Lat. theriaca, teriaca, triaca.—Dief. Sup.

Tread, AS. tredan, Pl.D. treden, treen, G. treten, ON. troda, Goth. trudan, to tread. W. troed, Gael. troidh, troigh, foot.

Treason. See Traitor.

Treasure. Fr. trésor, Sp. tesoro, from Lat. thesaurus.

To Treat. Lat. traho, tractum, to draw, whence tracto, Fr. traicter, traiter, to handle, meddle with, entertain, treat.

Treble.—Triple. OFr. treble, triple, Lat. triplus, Gr. τρίπλοος, τρίπλοῦς, three- fold. The highest part in music is called treble. The human voices sung a triple hie.—Fairfax. I have sic pleasour at my hart That garris me sing the troubill pairt, Wold sum gude fellow fill the quart. Lyndsay Satire of the three Estates.

Tree. AS. treow, Goth. triw, ON. tré, tree, wood. W. derw, Gr. δρῦς, an oak; OSlav. drjevo, Boh. dřewo, tree.

Trellis. Fr. treillis, any latticed or grated frame.—Cot. Treille, an arbour or walk covered with vines. Lat. trichila, an arbour.

Tremble.—Tremendous.—Tremulous.—Trepidation.—Intrepid. Gr. τρέμω, Lat. tremo, to tremble, to quake for fear; tremulus, quaking, and thence It. tremolare, Fr. trembler, to tremble. The original form of the root is preserved in Lat. trepidus, trembling; trepido, to tremble, to pant. Russ. trepetaty, to palpitate, tremble; trepet, shivering, trembling, fear. Boh. trepati, to clash, to beat; trepatise, to palpitate, tremble.

Trench.—Trencher. Prov. trencar, to cut off, to break; It. trinciare, Fr. trancher, formerly trencher, to cut off, to cut to pieces; tranchées, the trenches or ditches cut before a besieged place; tranchoir, a trencher or wooden plate on which our ancestors cut up their meat at meals. The primary meaning seems to be to crack or break, then to break or divide into small pieces, to divide or cut. Ptg. trinco, snapping of the fingers; trincar, to crack as a nut with the teeth, to crunch, to gnaw. Sp. trincar, to break, chop, divide into small pieces. Cat. trencar, to break. Prov. trencar, trenchar, trinquar, to break, cleave, cut, break off. ' Lo dorc se trenca :' the crock is broken. It may be doubted whether the It. trincare, Fr. trinquer, to tope or quaff, does not properly signify the knocking of glasses, instead of being derived from G. trinken, as commonly supposed. Cousinly explains Castrais trinca, knocking glasses as a pledge in drinking.

To Trend. See Trundle.

To Trend. In nautical language, to turn or bend in a certain direction. Not far beneath i' the valley as she trends Her silver stream.—Brown. AS. trindel, an orb, a circle; Sw. trind, round. See Trundle.

Trepan. Gr. τρύπανον, Mid.Lat. trepanum, a borer for a broken skull; τρυπάω, to bore, to pierce.

To Trepan.—Trapan. To ensnare or entrap. Nothing but gins, and snares and trapans for souls.—South, Sermons. If these swear true he was trapanned on shipboard.—Stillingfleet, Speech in 1692. According to Fl. It. trapanare signified in a met. sense ' to slide and pass through with speed and closely, to cheat.' Io non so se tu trapani nel secreto del mio intendimento.—Aretino.

Trepidation, -trepid. See Tremble.
Trespass. Fr. trespasser, to overpass, exceed, pass on or over;—son serment, to break or go from his oath.—Cot. Lat. trans, beyond, and passus, a step.
Tress. It. treccia, Fr. tresse, Sp. trenza, explained by Diez as a plait of three bands of hair, from Gr. τρι-χα, threefold. So It. trena, a threefold rope, Prov. trena, a tress, from Lat. trinus. Entrenar, to interlace, to plait.
Trestle. A crossbeam resting on two pair of legs, for the support of boards serving as a table or scaffolding or the like. OFr. trestel, Fr. treteau, dim. of OFr. traste (Roquef.), It. trasto, a transom or crossbeam. Sc. trest, traist, the frame of a table, trestles. Trabem, trastrum.—Gl. Reichenau. Lat. transtrum, a cross-beam. The analogy of the Celtic languages leaves it hardly doubtful (in spite of Gr. θρανος, a serving bench) that the word is derived from the prep. trans, across, or its representatives, W. traws, transverse, across ; trawst, a rafter. Bret. treuzi, to cross ; a dreuz, across ; treuzel, crossbar ; treust, beam, rafter ; treustel, trestle, lintel of a door. Gael. thar, over, across ; tarsuinn, transverse, across ; tarsannan, tarsnan, a cross-beam. Diez erroneously derives the word from Du. driestal, a trivet.
Trevet.—Trivet. Du. drijvoet, treeft, Fr. trépied, a support standing on three feet.
Tri-. Lat. tre-; tres, three.
Tribe.—Tribune. Lat. tribus, one of the three bodies into which the Romans were originally divided. The magistrate presiding over each of these tribes was called tribunus, a tribune.
Tribulation. From Lat. tero, tritum, to rub, bruise, bray, thresh, springs tribula, a dray used for beating out the corn, and thence tribulo, to beat out the corn, to thresh, and met. to afflict, vex, oppress.
Tribute, -tribute. Lat. tribuo, to hand over, to grant, allot, divide. Tributum, tax, impost paid by the people for the public expense. Hence Attribute, Contribute, Distribute, Retribution.
-tricate. -trigue. Lat. tricæ, trifles, impediments ; whence intrico, -atum, to entangle; extrico, to disentangle, extricate. From intrico also is Fr. intriguer (in the place of which Cot. has intriguer, intrinquer), to perplex, puzzle ; intrigue, a plot, entanglement, intrigue.
Trice. A moment.
And whan that he him moste avaunteth, That lord whiche vainglorie daunteth, All sodenly as who saith treis, Where that he stode in his paleis.
Gower. Conf. A. b. 1.
Sp. tris, crack, noise made in breaking, thence a trice, an instant. Venir en un tris, to come in a trice. So in Sc. in a crack, immediately.—Jam.
Poor Tackles' grimly ghost was vanished in a crack.—Lewis.
To Trice. To hoist or hale up aloft.
For the horses he had, them he made to be girt before one after the other, and then did softly trise them with long pulleys fastened to the beames.—North, Plutarch.
Sw. trissa. Da. tridse, a pulley; tridse, to hoist or lower by means of pulleys ; Pl.D. drysen, updrysen, to hoist ; dryse-blok, a pulley. Trisel, a whirling, turning round, dizziness, giddiness, a top. Trisel-stroom, -wind, a whirlpool, whirlwind.—Brem. Wtb.
Trick. Du. trekken, to pluck, pull, draw; trek, a stroke of a pen, draught, pull, tug; a trick at cards, i. e. the collection taken up off the board at once. Een' trek spelen, to play one a trick. In the same way G. streich, a stroke, a trick.
I am inclined to believe that Fr. tricher, to cozen, cheat, deceive, use false tricks (Cot.), is from a different source, viz. from the representation of a blurt with the mouth by the syllable truc, so that tricher would be equivalent to E. pop in the sense of cheating. NE. trucky, cheating.—Hal. Truc, popping or sound with the lips wherewith we use to encourage a horse.—Cot. It. truscare, to blurt or pop with one's lips or mouth; truscio di labbra, a blurting or popping with one's lips or tongue, for to encourage a horse (Fl.), from which last must be explained Fr. trousse, a cozening trick, blurt, slampant.—Cot. See Trifle.
To Trickle.—Trinkle. The radical signification seems to be to roll or advance with an undulating motion. We speak indifferently of tears trickling or rolling down the cheeks. To trickle in the E. of E. is used for the rolling of a solid body. ' Trickle me that orange across the table.'—Forby. Devon. truckle, to roll, a roller under a heavy weight.—Hal. W. treiglo, to roll or turn over, to wander about. Sc. trigil, trigle, to trickle.
Be all thir teris trigilland ouer my face.—D. V. 110. 86.
The sense of rolling is generally expressed by the figure of broken sound, and thus It. rotolare, to roll, has been connected with E. rattle. We speak of the roll of the drum or of thunder. In like manner trickle, truckle, seem to be connected with forms like Sp. trique-traque, clattering, clashing; traquear, traquetear, to crack, crackle, to shake to and fro; Alban. trok, trokelin, I knock at a door, and with the nasal, tringelin, I ring, clink; trongelin, I knock, clap, to be compared with Sc. trinkle, to tingle, to trickle. 'The tears trinkled down her cheek.'—Moor.
Parallel forms with exchange of the final k for t, are E. dial. trittle, ON. tritla, It. trottolare, to roll, bowl, twirl; Sc. trintle, to roll, to trickle.
Trident. Lat. tridens; tres, three, and dens, a tooth.
Trifle. It. truffa, a roguish trick, a cheat, a trifle, toy, an idle thing; stare in truffo, to play the fool, to toy or trifle.—Altieri. Fr. truffe, trufle, a gibe, mock, flout, jest, gullery; truffer, truffler, to mock or jibe at, to lie, cheat.
Hold thy tonge, Mercy, Hit is trufle that thou tellest.—P. P.
How doth our bysshop tryfle and mocke us. Berner's Froissart.
The origin is probably the representation of a contemptuous blurt with the mouth. It. tronfare, tronfiare, to snort, to huff or snuff with anger, also to trump.—Fl. Walach. trufi, to swell with pride.
Trigger.—Tricker. Du. trekken, to pull; trekker, the trigger, by pulling which the gun is let off. Sw. trycka, to press; trycka af, to let off a gun; tryckje, latch of a door, trigger of a gun.
Trigonometry. Gr. τρίγωνον, a triangle.
To Trill. To turn, to roll, to trickle. Sw. trilla, to roll; Da. trille, to roll, to trundle; trillebör, a wheelbarrow ON. trilla, to run about.
In the Squire's Tale Cambuscan is directed to guide the movements of a horse by trilling a pin in his ear.
—Sudden smarts, Which daily chance as Fortune trills the ball. Gascoigne.
His salte teares trilled adowne as reyne. Prioress' Tale.
The radical image is a quavering sound, from whence the expression is transferred to a quavering, vibratory, or whirling movement. It. trigliare, trillare, to quaver with the voice in singing; w. treigl, a rolling over, walking about; Sc. trigil, trigle, E. trickle, to roll as tears. Swiss trohlen, to thunder, to roll; abe trohlen, to roll down, to come rumbling down; trohlen, to bowl, to roll.
Trim. AS. trum, firm, stedfast, trymian, trymman, to confirm, strengthen, establish, prepare, dispose, set in order. Garas trymedon, they prepared arms. Trymede getimbro, would prepare buildings. Geleafan getrymian, to confirm belief. To trim the boat is to steady it. To trim a garment is to set it in order, to give it the necessary ornaments to set it off. Trim is what is properly decked out.
Trinity. Lat. trinus, of three, three and three together.
Trinkets. Gewgaws, toys.—B. Probably to be explained from the rattling which pleases children in their toys, as Lat. crepundia, toys, from crepere, to rattle. Ptg. trinco, snapping of the fingers; trinco da porta, the latch of a door. Fr. traquet, a rattle, a mill clack; triqueniques, trifles, things of no value. Walach. trankof, a rattle, a trifle, anything ridiculous.
To Trip. G. trapp-trapp-trapp represents the sound of the footfall; trippeln, to trip, to move by short quick steps. Du. trappen, trippen, to tread; trippen, trippelen, trepelen, to dance.—K. Da. trip, a short step. Bret. tripa, to dance, skip, stamp. Fr. triper, to tread, stamp, trample.
Tripe. It. trippa, Sp. tripa, Fr. tripe, Bret. triper, w. tripa, belly, guts.
Tripod. Gr. τρίπους, τρίποδος, three-footed.
To Trise. See Trice.
* Trist.—Tryste. An appointed time or place. ON. treysta, treystast til, to rely upon; Sc. traist, treist, to trust, to pledge faith.
Thocht thow be greit like Gowmakmome, Traist weill I sal yow meit the morne. Lyndsay.
Syne thai traist in the field throw trety of trew. Gaw. and Gol.
Trite, -trite.—Triturate. Lat. tero, tritum, to rub, grind down, pound, thresh, wear away; tritus, worn, much used, broken, ground; tritare, to thresh or pound. Contrite, broken down.
Triumph. Lat. triumphus.
Trivet. Fr. trépied, Lat. tripes, trepedis, a three-footed stand.
Trivial. Lat. trivialis, common, from trivium, a place where three roads meet, a place of common resort.
To Troll.—Trowl. 1. To roll or trundle. To trowl the bowl is to push it round. As roll answers to It. rotolare, so troll answers to trottolare, to turn and twirl, to roll and tumble down, whence trottolo, a top.—Fl. So ON. tritill, N. trill, a pulley, a top.

Ultimately from the figure of a broken sound, from whence the expression is transferred to a broken, reciprocating, or rolling movement. Brescian trotolà, to make the noise of boiling water, to bubble up; Sc. trattle, to prattle, chatter, patter; E. dial. trattles, trottles, truttles, the pellet-shaped dung of sheep or rabbits, which falls pattering down. Swiss trohlen, to thunder, to roll; abetrohlen, to come tumbling down; trohli, a roller; trohlen, to bowl, roll; Pl.D. trill'n, N. trulla, E. dial. trull, to trundle, roll; Pl.D. trüll, anything of a rounded form; appel-trüll, an apple-dumpling. W. trolio, to trundle, roll; trol, a cylinder. As trill, to roll, was found related to two parallel forms shown in ON. tritill, a top, and E. trickle, so troll or trull is related to It. trottola, a top, and E. truckle.

2. To troll or trowl a song is probably to roll it out with rise and fall of voice, but it may possibly be the equivalent of G. trallen, trallern, trällern, Swiss trallen, tralallen, tralallen, to sing a tune, to sound notes without words; from a representation of the notes by the syllables tra-la-la. 'Sie leiern und tralallen.' 'Mit singen und tralären.' 'Wenn er ein lustiges liedchen trallert.'

Trollop. A slattern.—Hal. Banff trollop, to hang in a wet state; 'The bairn cam in wee 'its frockie a' trollopin' aboot its leggies:' to do any work in a slovenly manner, to walk in an unbecoming dirty manner. Trollop, a large piece of rag, especially wet rag, a tall ill-made person of dirty habits. From the sound of dabbling in the wet. A parallel form is drabble, to draggle in the mire (Banff); a person of dirty habits, a small quantity of liquid. Draplyd, drablyd, paludosus; drobly, feculentus, turbu-lentus.—Pr. Pm. Gael. druablas, muddy liquor; druabag, a small drop, weak drink; dregs, tippling. For the connection between trollop and drabble, draple, comp. wallop and wabble, G. schwalpen and schmappeln.

Troop. Sp. tropa, Fr. troupe. It. truppa, a body of men. Prov. trop, Sp. tropel, Fr. troupeau, a herd of cattle. W. torp, a round mass or lump; torpell, a small mass, a clod, a dumpling.

Trope.—Tropic. Gr. τρέπω, to turn; Τρόπος, a turn, a changed or figurative expression; Τροπή, a turning; the solstice or place where the sun seems to change his course, whence tropic, the latitude of the solstices.

Trophy. Gr. τρόπαιον, Lat. tropæum, a monument of the enemy's defeat; τροπή, a turning or putting to flight.

Trot. Diez would derive It. trottare, Fr. trotter, to trot, from Lat. tolutare, contracted to tlutare, with change from l to r as in Fr. chapitre from capitulum. There is however no need to resort to this contraction. Trott! is used in G. synonymous with trapp! to represent the sound of the footfall.—Sanders. We have then Sw. tratta, to trip, to trot; ODu. tratten, to step, to tread; trat, a step.—Kil.; G. treten, to step; tritt, a step. Bret. trota, to trot, to walk much; trotella, to run here and there.

Troth. See Truth.

Trouble. Immediately from Fr. troubler, OFr. tourbler. It. torbolare, turbolare, and next from Lat. turbare, to disturb. Alban. tourbouloig, troubouloig, to muddy, confuse, disturb. The radical signification seems to be to stun or confuse by a loud noise, to put into confusion, to thicken or make liquors unclear. Gr. θόρυβος, noise, uproar, tumult; θορυβέω, to disturb with noise or tumult, to trouble. Castrais treba (tapager), to make a racket at night like ghosts, to rout or toss about in bed; treboula, to trouble water. Central Fr. trebou, terbou, a tempest; tribou, triboul, a whirlwind, storm, great noise, confusion, agitation, disquiet. Limousin trebla, to disturb by noise; se trebla, to become confused, to lose one's head. Bret. trabel, a rattle, clatter; Prov. trebalh, chatter; trebalhar, to agitate, disturb, trouble, torment; Fr. triballer, to make a noise or disturbance. 'Le bruit et la triballe des gens de noces vous romproient tout le testament.'—Rabelais iii. 30. In liv. v. ch. i. the same author speaks of the 'trimballement des poesles, chauderons, cymbales,' the clinking of pots, kettles, cymbals. Trinquiballer les cloches, to jangle bells or ring them untunably—Cot.; tringueballer, to run about or carry about from place to place.—Hécart. Norm. trimballer, to jangle bells, to carry about from place to place.—Decorde. OFr. triballer, and in vulgar language trimballer, to agitate, stir; tribouil, tribouil, agitation, disorder, trouble, affliction.—Roquef. Tribouiller, to shog or jog like a cart in an uneven way, and hence to jumble, disorder; triboule-menage, an unskilful husband, one that mars his own business.—Cot. Wal. triboli, to chime bells.—Remacle. Champ. triballer, to shake; tribouiller, to agitate, stir; tribouiller, to vex.

Trough. It. truogo, truogolo, Walach. troc, OHG. trog, Norm. treu, tros.

* To Trounce. The passage in Judges 4. 15, 'the Lord discomfited Sisera and his chariots and all his host with the edge of the sword,' is rendered 'trounced' in the Bible of 1551. From OFr. tronce, a piece of wood, and thence troncer, troncir, tronquer, briser, rompre, mettre en pieces.—Roquef. Troncir, to cut or break off, or in two, or into pieces.—Cot. Sp. tronzar, to shatter, to break to pieces.

Trover. An action for the possession of goods founded on the pretence that the defendant has found them and appropriated them. OFr. trover, to find. See Contrive.

To Trow. See True.

Trowel. Fr. truelle, Lat. trulla, truella, a ladle, trowel.

Trowsers.—Trouse. Commonly mentioned in the earlier passages as an Irish dress. 'Their breeches like the Irish trooze have hose and stockings sewed together.'—Sir T. Herbert. 'The leather quilted jack serves under his shirt of mail, and to cover his trouse on horseback.'—Spencer on Ireland. Gael. triubhas, Ir. triuinhas, trius, breeches and stockings in one piece. It seems to have been a strip of cloth wrapped round the legs and thighs.

Truant. Sp. truhan, Fr. truand, a beggar, vagabond, rogue. In Limousin it is used in the sense of idle. Cornish tru, W. truan, poor, miserable, wretched; Gael. truagh, wretched, miserable; truaghan, a wretched creature.

Truce. It. tregua, Fr. trève, formerly used in the plural, trèves : trèves brisées, the breach of a granted protection.—Cot. Unes trues.—Froiss. i. 50.
Tant qu'il avint, ne sai coment, Que les trues furent rompues Et les guerres sont revenues.
Fabliaux et Contes, 3. 64.

Hence OE. trews.—Capgrave, 185. The origin is ON. tryggr, secure, trusty; tryggd, troth, security, assurance, agreement, peace. It was commonly used in the plural, tryggdir, whence the plural form of Fr. trèves, and E. trews, truce. Goth. tryggva, covenant. See True.

-trude. -trus-. Lat. trudo, trusum, to thrust, push forward : as in Intrude, Extrusion, Protrude.

Truck. 1. Traffic by exchange of goods. Sp. trocar, Fr. troquer, to chop, swap, truck, barter.

The radical meaning of the word is a knock or blow. Fr. truc, a blow or thwack, a smack with the lips.—Cot. Limousin truca, to strike or knock; truco, a bruise; truc, knack; o lou truc d'oco, he has the knack of it. Piedm. truché, Milan. truccar, Brescian, traccà, to knock. Truce or tracch is then, metaphorically, a piece of business; fare un buon trucco, as we say in E. to do a good stroke of business.—Diz. Parmeg. The sense of exchange is explained by Piedm. baraté or canbié truch-a-truch, to barter or exchange thing for thing. Fr. troc pour troc, exchange of one thing for another. It is to be observed that the familiar synonyms swap and chop both radically signify a stroke, a quick turn.

From the sense of knocking also comes the game of trucks or billiards, It. trucco, Piedm. truch, in which the balls are struck by a mace. Fé un truch, to make a stroke.

Truck. 2.—Truckle. Devon. truckle, to roll, whence truckle, a pulley, a roller under a heavy weight.—Hal. A truck is a small solid wheel for ordnance, also the round disk at the top of a mast. It. troco, a top.

A truckle-bed is a bed that is rolled in under another, and drawn out when wanted for use; and such beds being occupied by attendants or inferiors, to truckle was metaphorically used in the sense of knocking under to one, acting in a servile manner. One of the conditions prescribed to a humble chaplain and tutor in a squire's family, according to Hall, was First that he lie upon the truckle-bed While his young master lieth o'er his head.
Nares.

It was also called a trundle-bed.

The connection of the idea of rolling with a rattling or broken sound has been repeatedly indicated, as under Roll, Troll, Trickle. Thus truc as a root signifying roll may be connected with such forms as Sp. traquear, traquetear, to crack, crackle, shake, move to and fro; Alban. trok, trokelin, I knock.

To Trudge. The sense of contemptuous displeasure or rejection is often expressed by a blurt of the mouth or offensive pop with the lips, and when the sound so made is imported into speech it is represented by the syllables Prut, Ptrot, Ptrupt, Tprot, Trut, Trots, which were used as interjections of contempt and defiance. Examples of many of these are given under Proud. We may add Ptrot, skornefulle word, or trut, Vath, Raca, ptrupt or fye! Vath, interjectio derisionis vel increpacionis, Tworl!—Pr. Pm. p. 415. A foule herlote hem slowe, trat! for his renown. R. Brunne, p. 317.
The interjection takes the form of trutz, trotz, tratz, in G. 'Ja trutz! wer tar küssen mich; Trut! who dares kiss me.'—Schmeller.
The derivation of the interjection from the sound of a blurt with the lips is shown by It. truscare, to blurt or pop with the mouth; truscio di labbra, a blurting or popping with one's lips or tongue, to encourage a horse—Fl.; Fr. truc, the popping or sound of the lips whereby we encourage a horse—Cot.; ON. prutta (Haldorsen), trutta (Jonsson), to make a noise with the mouth in driving cattle; Sw. prutta, to make an offensive sound with the mouth.
Now the expression of contemptuous displeasure, when uttered by a superior in answer to the application of an inferior, has the effect of driving the latter from his presence, and thus the interjection may be interpreted off! begone! Thus the Gael. interjection truis (pronounced truish), trus, is explained 'a word by which dogs are silenced or driven away.'—Mac-leod. 'Trus u mach! trus ort!' (mach, out; ort, upon thee), begone, get away.—Shaw. It. truccare, 'to scud, to pack away nimbly.'—Fl. 'Trucca via! be off with you.' In OE. trus! was used in the sense of begone.
Lyere—was nowher welcome, for his manye tales Over al yhonted, and yhote, trusse! P. P. 1. 1319.
Thin help quoth Beryn, lewd fole thou art more than masid, Dress thee to the shippisward with thy crown yrasid, For I might never spare thee bet, trus! and be agoo.—Chaucer, Beryn, 2269.
In the same way Gascoigne uses trudge! which would correspond exactly to G. trotz! This tale once told none other speech prevails, Pack and trudge! all leysure was too long.
The primary sense of trudge is thus to hurry away from the presence of the speaker, then to go steadily along as if under compulsion. 'And let them trudge hence apace till they come to their mayster of myschef.'—Bale in R. The same train of thought may be observed in ON. putt! Da. pyt! Norman pet! (Decorde), psha! tut! interjection of contempt and rejection; from whence must be explained the American put! begone! (Biglow Papers, 2nd Series, xxxvii.); to put, to start, decamp, be off. 'I see I'm not wanted here, so I'll put.'—Bartlett.
True.—Truth.—Trow.—Troth. The primitive form known to us seems to be Goth. triggws, ON. tryggr, reliable, faith-ful, sure, true. ON. trúr, sure, trusty. 'Hve trútt mun þat? is that sure, can one trust to it?' Trúa, Da. troe, Goth. trauan, G. trauen, to believe, to trow, to confide in; Goth. traueins, trust, confidence, boldness; AS. treowa, truwa, trust, faith, a pledge, a covenant; treowian, truwian, to trust, confide, trow, justify; treowth, trywth, ON. tryggð, troth, truth, treaty, league, covenant.
Trull. A sorry wench, a vile strumpet.—B. Trolly, a dirty indolent sloven.—Mrs Baker. G. trolle, a coarse, sluttish woman.—K. The radical meaning of this abusive term is very doubtful. Per-haps it may be explained by Rouchi troute, a sow, and also a strumpet, a coarse slut, from troulier, to wallow in the mud; Lang. troulia, to tread grapes, to tramp in wet and mud. Central Fr. trouiller, to dirty; trouille, trouillon, a slut. Banff troll, trull, to work or walk in a slovenly manner; a person of sloven-ly habits.
To Trump. To trump, to lie, to boast.—Hal. To trump up a story is to get up a fraudulent story. The origin seems to be a contemptuous blurt with the mouth, represented by the syllable trump. The E. trump is used for various disagreeable noises. It. trombare, trombettare, to make a rattling noise, to snort, break wind, to bray or trump as an ass; strombare, strombettare, to blurt with one's mouth; strombazzare, to hout, shout, to hiss or flurt at in scorn or reproach.—Fl. Tronfare, to snort, to huff, snuff, or chafe with anger, also to trump.—Fl. From the figure of a contemptuous blurt seems to arise the use of trump in the sense of playing a trick upon, deceiving, cheating.
Fortune, When she is pleased to trick or tromp mankind. B. Jonson.
Authors have been trumped upon us interpolated and corrupted.—Leslie in Todd. Fr. tromper, OSp. trompar, to cheat, to deceive.
Trump. I.—Trumpet. The syllable trub or trump, represents a loud, harsh sound, in Let. trūbēt, to snore, to sound a horn, Lith. truba, a herdsman's horn, Russ., Boh. truba. It. tromba, Fr. trompe, trompette, a trumpet, ON., OHG. trumba, a drum.
2. A trump at cards. Fr. triomphe,

Ptg. triunfo, Sp. triunfo, G. trumpf, Du. troef. Latimer uses triumph and trump indifferently. The question arises whether trump is a corruption of triomphe, as commonly supposed, or whether triomphe may not be an accommodation from G. trumpf. The G. trumpfen, is used in the sense of giving one a sharp reprimand or set-down, which indeed may be from the figure of trumping his card; but, on the other hand, it may be the older sense of the word. A trump is a card which gives a sudden set-down to the party who was winning the trick, and the word might acquire that sense from the figure of a contemptuous blurt or offensive noise with the lips. See To Trump.

* Trumpery. "Worthless matters, trifles. Hesse, trumel, trombel, trumpel, a trifle. 'Die sache ist um einen trumpel gekauft worden.' G. trumm, end, piece, fragment; trümmer (pl.), ruins, rubbish. Sc. trump, a trifle, a thing of little value (Jam.); trumps, a depreciatory term for goods, odds and ends. Grant that our navy thvs fyre may eschape, And from distructioun delyver and out scrape The sobir trumpis, and meyne graith of Troyanis. D. V. 150. 55.

* Truncheon. A short staff. Fr. tronçon, a piece cut or broken off as of a lance, a sword, &c. It. torso, a stock, stump, trunk, stalk of cabbage. Sp. trozo. Cat. tros, Prov. tros, OFr. tros, tron, a stump, end, fragment; Piedm. trôs, OFr. tron de chou, cabbage-stalk; trox de pomme, core of an apple. Prov. trosar, Sp. tronsar, to break to pieces. The foregoing seem to be modified forms of Lat. truncus, a stump, stem, stock, and to be related to Bav. trumm, a stump, end, piece, as G. strunk, to strumpf, a stump, or as E. trunk (of an elephant), to Fr. trompe. See Trunk.

Trundle. Fr. trondeler, rondeler, to turn, wind, wheel.—Cot. AS. trendel, an orb or circle. Sw. Da. trind, round. Banff trintle, to trickle. The foregoing are nasalised versions of forms like It. trottolare, ON. tritla, trita, to twirl, turn round (whence It. trottola, ON. tritill, a top), E. trittle, to bowl or roll; Banff tratle, to trickle. The notion of movement to and fro is often represented by the repetition of measured sounds, and the notion of reciprocating movement insensibly passes into that of rolling or turning round. Thus from bom! bom! representing a ringing sound, we have G. bommeln, baumeln, to swing to and fro, as E. dangle from ding! dong! or It. dondolare, to dangle or swing, from don-don representing the sound of bells. In the south of France we find drin-drin, drindran for the sound of bells, and dritidoula, trandoula, to sway to and fro, to swing; drindoul, drindol, trantoul, a swing (Cousinié); trantoula, Lang. trantalia, Lim. trontoula. Cat. trontollar, to stagger, shake, waggle; exactly corresponding to E. trundle, to roll.

Trunk. Lat. truncus, Fr. tronc, the stock, stem, or body of a tree without the boughs, the body of a man without the limbs; also the poor man's box in churches.—Cot. By the foresayde place or shryne where the holy martyrs bodies lay he ordeyned a cheste or trunke of clene sylver, to the intente that all such jewellys and ryche gyftes as were offryd to the holy seyntis should therein be kepte to the use of the mynistres of the same place.—Fabyan, Chron. in R. A chest would seem to be called a trunk as resembling the trunk or chest of a man's body. In the same way G. rumpf, the trunk of the body, is applied to a hollow vessel of different kinds. We find two series of forms, with a final labial and guttural respectively, signifying a stump or projecting end. On the one hand we have E. stub, stump, Du. strobbe, a shrub, G. strumpf, rumpf, a stump or trunk; and on the other. It. zocoo, E. stock, Du. struik, a stump, stalk, bush, and with the nasal, stronk, G. strunk, Lat. truncus, a stump, stalk. The radical image is something sticking or striking out, from forms like E. shack, concussion, Du. suckelen, strobbelen, struikelen, to stumble or dash the foot against, together with the numerous forms cited under Truck, signifying knock. Lat. trunco, to cut short (whence E. truncate), is from the notion of reducing to a trunk or stump, and not vice versâ.

Trunnion. Knobs of a gun's metal which bear her upon the cheeks of the carriage.—B. From Fr. trognon, troignon, the stalk of a cabbage with the leaves pulled off, core of a fruit with the flesh gone, trunk of a branchless tree; and that from It. troncone, as moignon, mugnon, E. munnion (mullion), from moncone, a stump.

Truss. Fr. trousser, to pluck up, tuck up, pack up; trousseau, a bundle; troussis, a tuck. Sc. turse, to pack up in a bale or bundle, to carry off hastily, to take oneself off. To turss forth, to bring forth what has been kept in store.

This jowell he gert turss in till Ingland. Wallace.
OFr. torser, to pack up, to make a bundle. Prov. torser, torsser, to twist; estorser, to extort, to pluck away from; OSp. trossa, Lombard torza, torsa, Sp. torca, truss of hay or straw.—Diez. Fr. torche, torchon, a wisp of straw. W. torchi, to twist, to wreathe, to turn up; torcha dy lewis, truss up thy sleeves.
Trust. N. traust, fast, steady, solid, hard, strong; ON. trausir, solid, strong, reliable, true; traust, reliance, assistance, support; treysta, to make fast, secure, to try the strength of, to rely upon, rest upon. Goth. trausti, a covenant. See True.
To Try. Tryynge, eleccio, preeleccio, examinatio.—Pr. Pm. Fr. trier, to pick, to select, to sift out the truth. Explained by Diez from Lat. terere, tritum, to tread out or thresh corn, from the figure of sifting out the grain from the straw. It. tritare, tritolare, to break very small; met; to ponder or consider; tritamento, the threshing of corn.—Fl. Piedm. trié, to stamp, grind, wear down; trii, beaten, ground down. Tria via, a beaten path.—Gl. Paris, in Diez. Cat. triar el arroz, to pick or clean rice. 'Dieu triara lo gra de la palha al jorn de jutjamen.' 'Sap triar los nescis dels senats:' he can distinguish the foolish from the wise.—Rayn.
Tub. Du. tobbe, Pl.D. tubbe, dubbe, G. zuber, zober, OHG. zuibar, zuuipar, explained by Schmeller as a vessel to be borne in two hands, as OHG. ainbar, einpar, G. eimer, a pail or bucket, a vessel to be carried in one hand. From OHG. beran, to bear or carry.
Tube.—Tubular. Lat. tuba, a trumpet.
Tuber.—Tubercle. Lat. tuber, a fungus, a swelling on a man's body; whence dim. tuberculum.
Tuck, A sword. W. twc, a chip, a cut; twca, a knife; twcio, to clip, to trim.
To Tuck. To turn or gather up—B. : to turn in the bedclothes. G. zucken, to draw in, to twitch, to shrug. Den degen—, to draw the sword; den kopf—, to shrink in order to ward off a blow; das zucken, a convulsion; Pl.D. tukken, tukkschuldern, to shrug the shoulders. Dat oge tukket mi, my eye palpitates. G. zug, a draught, pull, stroke, from Ziehen, pr. zog, AS. teon, getogen, to draw.
Tucking-mill. A fulling-mill for thickening cloth, w. tew, Ir. tiugh, thick; W. tewychu, Gael. tiughaich, to thicken; Ir. tiugh-millean, a tucking-mill.
Tuft. Fr. touffe, touffet, a group or bunch of hair, trees, &c. Pl.D. topp, top, summit, also as G. zopf, a tuft of hair. W. twb, a round lump; twff, a tuft. Fr. toupeau, toupet, a tuft or tassel of silk, &c., forelock of a horse. ON. toppr, summit, top, also tuft of hair, forelock. See Top.
To Tug. Commonly derived from AS. teon, getogen, to pull, ON. tog, G. zug, a pull or draught. But it is more likely, analogous to the verb to lug (from Sc. lug, anything hanging, as the ear or locks of hair), to seize by something hanging. Thus we have Swiss tschogg, a hanging lock, tschoggen, to pull by the hair; Lap. tuogge, a tangled lock. Fin. tukka, forelock, hanging lock, tukkata, to pull by the hair; G. zopf, a tuft or lock of hair, zopfen, zupfen, to lug, pull, twitch; schopf, a tuft of hair, Austr. schopfen, schufeln, to pull by the hair; Pol. czub, hair of the head, czubić, to pull one by the hair;—sie, to fall together by the ears; Lett. tschuppis, bunch of hair, tschuppindt, to pull by the hair, scuffle.
Tuition, -tuition. — Tutor. Lat. tueor, tuitus sum, to look, and thence to guard, protect, defend. Hence tutor, for tuitor, a defender, guardian, teacher; tutus, looked after, guarded, safe. Intuition, a looking upon.
To Tumble. Fr. tomber. It. tomare, tombolare, ON. tumba, to fall. AS. tumbian, to dance.
Hyt telleth that Eroud swore To her that tumblede on the flore. Manuel des Pecchés, 2823.
In the original, A une pucelle qui devant lui tumta.
The origin is a representation of the noise made by a heavy body falling, or by striking the ground with the feet in dancing. Brescian tonf, noise made in falling, or the fall itself; tonfete, noise of repeated blows; Parmesan tonfar, to knock; far tonf tonfolare, to make the sound of a fall; Fr. tombir, to make a noise with stamping or trampling. W. twmpian, to stamp, thump, strike upon; twmpio, to drop, to fall. Norm. faire top, to fall, to let a thing fall.
Tumid. — Tumour. Lat. tumeo, to swell, be puffed up.
Tumult. Lat tumultus. Probably tum is the radical syllable representing loud noise, as in tom-tom, a drum.
Tun. Prov. tona, Fr. tonne, ON., OHG. tunna, Lat. tina, a cask.
Tune. Fr. ton, Lat. tonus, a sound.
Tunnel. I. A funnel or tundish for pouring liquors into a cask, and thence the pipe of a chimney. It will be observed that funnel also is used in both senses. The smoke ascends from the wide open fireplace through the pipe of the chimney, as water, which is poured into the broad mouth of a tunnel or funnel, runs away through the narrow pipe which forms the other end of the implement.

One thing I much noted in the Haulle of Bolton, how chimenys were conveyed by tunnels made on the syde of the wauls betwixt the lights in the haull, and by this means and by no lovers is the smoke of the harthe in the hawle wonder strangly convayed.—Leland, Itin. viii.

To tun up, to put liquor into a tun; to tunnel, to fill vessels with liquor.—B. Doubtless Fr. tonneler was formerly used in the latter sense. Tunnellers on ship-board are men who fill casks with water.
2. Fr. tonnelle, a trellised walk, a vaulted roof, a net for partridges, tonnelet, a hoop petticoat (Gattel), as well as E. tunnel, a net for partridges, a vaulted under-ground passage, must be explained from the resemblance of the object to a tun or cask, inasfar as it consists of a hooped structure : a hooped net, hooped petticoat, hooped or ribbed roof.

Tup. OFr. toup, a ram.—Bibelesworth. Perhaps from the tendency of the animal to butt or strike with the head. It. toppa-toppa represents the sound of repeated blows; toppare, to countershock, to stumble upon by chance.—Fl.

Turban. Fr. turban, It. turbante. Commonly referred to Pers. dulbend. As the name is not known either in Turkish or Arabic, may it not be from Fr. turbin, a whelk? to which from its conical shape and spiral folds the object bears a striking resemblance.

-turb.—Turbid.—Turbulent. Lat. turbo, to trouble, disturb, embroil; turbidus, troubled, muddy, thick; turba, trouble, bustle, debate, a crowd or throng. See Trouble.

Turbot. Du. bot, blunt; bot, botvisch, flat fish, plaice; tar-bot, turbot. Halibut is another kind of flat fish.

Turf. ON. torf. It. torba, Fr. tourbe. w. torp, a lump; torpell, a clod, a dumpling.

Turgid. Lat. turgeo, to swell.

Turkey. It is singular that a bird which came from America should have been considered as a Turkey fowl, but the same is the case with maize, which was called Turkey corn or Turkey wheat, Fr. bled de Turquie.

In Fr. it is poule d'Inde, fowl of the Indies, as the Western Colonies of Spain were called.

Turmoil. Skinner suggests Fr. tremouille, a mill-hopper, an object proverbial for the constant racket it keeps up. Central Fr. triboul, tribou, great noise, confusion, agitation, inquietude; tribouler, tribouiller, to agitate, stir, trouble. OFr. trimar, disturbance, noise.

Turn. Fr. tour, a turn; tourner, to turn. w. twm, a turn. Lat. tornare, to turn wood.

Turnip. The first element of the name probably indicates the round form of the root. Lat. napus, Fr. navet, a turnip.

Turquoise. A Turkish stone. Palsgrave translates Turkes bow, arc Turquois.

Turret. Fr. tourette, tourelle, a small tower.

Turtle. 1. It. tortora, tortola, tortorella, Sp. tortola, Lat. turtur, Albanian tourra, a turtle dove, the bird that cries tur! tur! Du. korren, to coo, to cry kor!
2. A sea-tortoise.

-tus-. -tuse. Lat. tundo, tusum, to beat, pound, bray in a mortar. Contusus, beaten, bruised; obtusus, thoroughly beaten, blunted, dulled, blunt, dull.

Tush!—Tut! Tush! like pish! pshaw! and other interjections of contempt, probably represents the act of spitting from disgust. It was formerly written twish! 'There is a cholerike or disdaineful interjection used in the Irish language called boogh! which is as much in English as twish!'—Hollinshed, Descrip. of Ireland. The Galla twu! represents the sound of spitting. Fris. twoy! Da. twi! interjection when one spits with disgust.—Outzen.

Tut! is a parallel form with Fr. trut! (representing a contemptuous or angry blurt with the lips), tush, tut, fy man; trut avant! a fig's end no such matter.—Cot. Tutty, ill-tempered, sullen.—Hal.

Tusk.—Tush. AS. tusc, tux, tuxla, a grinder; tuxel, the jaw. Fris. tos, tosch, task, tooth. Gael. tosg, tusk.

Tussock. A rough tuft of grass or sedge. w. dâs, a heap, a mow; Gael. dos, a bush, cluster, tuft, bunch of hair, tassel. Manx doss, a bunch, cluster, a bow of riband. Fr. tas, a heap; tasser, to heap, to make into trusses or bundles; tasse, a tuft of grass; tasse de foin, a truss of hay. Bav. doschen, duschen, with the dim. doschl, anything bushy, a nosegay, a tassel; dosten, a bunch, bush; Swab. doschet, doschicht, thick, bushy. Da. dusk, a tuft or tassel. Tuske of haire, monceau de cheveulx.—Palsgr. Sw. dial. tuss, a wisp of hay. See Tassel.
Tustle. Another form of touzle, toozle, to pull about roughly.—Hal. G. zausen, to tear and draw by violence ; sich zausen, to tumble one another about, to fight ; Pl.D. sik herumtuseln, to fight more in jest than earnest.—Schütze.
Tut ! Lith. tat ! interj. of contempt. See Tush.
Twang.—To Twank. Twang represents the resonance of a tense string, whence to twang a bow is to draw a bow and let the string spring back. To twangle is a contemptuous term for playing on a stringed instrument. A twang is a disagreeable resonance in a voice from speaking through the nose, and metaphorically, a strong disagreeable flavour in what is eaten or drunk.
As twang, ending with the guttural liquid ng, represents a resonant sound, so twank, in which the sound is cut off by the guttural check k, represents an abrupt sound. Thus to twank is to let fall the carpenter's line, which makes a sharp slap on the board ; to give a sharp slap with the palm of the hand on the breech, &c.—Forby.
Twattle. Betwattled, perplexed, confused, stupefied. The radical element twat corresponds to G. zotte, signifying a bush of hair, whence zotteln to entangle ; ' den verzottelten bart,' ' die verzottelte mähne.'—Sanders. The word perplexed derives its meaning from a similar metaphor. Pl.D. betunteld, betoteld, confused, tipsy. See Sanders in v. zote.
To Twattle.—Twaddle. To prate, chatter, talk foolishly. ' Insipid twittle-twattles, frothy jests and jingling witticisms.'—L'Estrange in Todd.
We have repeatedly observed the application of words representing the dashing of water to the sense of chatter or excessive talk ; as G. waschen, to wash, and also to prattle ; Bav. trätschen, trätscheln, N. strupla, to tramp in wet, also to chatter ; E. slattery, sladdery, wet and dirty, Da. sladder, tittle-tattle ; G. schwabbeln, to splash, to chatter ; Swiss schwalpen, to splash. Da. dial. svalpe, to tattle ; Bav. schwadern, schwatteln, to splash, dabble, also to chatter, tattle.
There is little doubt that twattle, twaddle, are formed in like manner. Swiss watteln, to dabble in the wet ; wätschgen, zwatschgen, to sound like water in the shoes. ON. thwatta (N. twatta), to jabber, prate, talk nonsense.
To Tweak. See Twitch.

Tweezers. An implement consisting of two pointed branches, for taking hold of small objects. From the numeral two. Swiss zwiser, zwieser, a forked twig ; Swab. zwisele, a forked stem ; a double stem springing from one root. Pl.D. twill, twiile, a forked branch, any forked object.
Twelve. Goth, tvalif, tvalib. See Eleven.
Twenty. G. zwanzig, Goth, tvaitigjus, ON. tuttugu, twenty ; tugr, tigr, a set of ten things.
Twig. Pl.D. twiig, G. zweig, twig, from zwei, two, as signifying the extreme divisions of the branches. Da. tvege, a two-pronged fork, a forked branch ; tveget, forked. From the figure of division in a moral sense is MHG. zweiec, zweig, at odds, in disagreement. In the same way Du. twist, discord, dissension ; OE. twist, a twig.
To Twig. In familiar language, to understand. Gael, tuig, understand, discern ; tuigse, understanding, reason, sense. Can it be that the sense of discernment or understanding, like that of twig, a shoot, arises from the figure of separation in (AS. twegen) twain?
Twill. G. zwillich, Lat. bilix, from bis and licium, a thread ; a web in which the threads are divided in sets of two, as G. drillich, drill, a web in which they are divided in a threefold way. Pl.D. twillen, to make double, to divide in two branches.
Twin. G. zwilling, OHG. zwinilinc, E. dial, twindilling, twinling, twindle, twin ; twin, to divide into two parts.— Hal. Goth, tveihnai, two and two together. Lith. dwyni, twins.
Twine. ON. tvinna. Da. twinde, to twine, radically, to double. ' I twyne threde, I double it with the spyndelle. Je retors. Twyned threde is stronger than syngell.'—Palsgr.
Twinge. A nasalised form of twitch.
To Twink.—Twinkle. The idea of a sparkling light is commonly expressed by the figure of a crackling, twittering, or tinkling sound. So Du. tintelen, to tinkle (Kil.), to twinkle as stars, to sparkle. E. twinkle also is provincially used in the sense of tinkle.—Hal. To twink, to twitter.
As a swallow in the air doth sing, With no continued song, but pausing still, Twinks out her scattered notes in accents shrill. Chapman, Odyss. xxi.
Twink, a chaffinch, from his twittering song.—Hal. Swiss zwyggen, to twitter ; zwinggen, zwinken, to wink, twinkle.
To Twire. To peep, glance, twinkle.

I saw the wench that twired and twinkled at thee.—B. & F.
Formed on the same plan with twinkle, from the representation of a twittering sound. It is used by Chaucer for the twittering of the bird which ' seeketh on morning only the wood, and twireth—"with her swete voise : ' dulci voce susurrat.—Boeth. iii. met. 2.
Fr. tirelire represents the singing of the lark ; Du. tireliren. It. turlurullare, to chirp and warble like birds.—Fl. E. tooraloora, as the burden of a song, represents the accompaniment of music. Then, passing to the sense of sight, and expressing the idea of peeping from the figure of winking at a sparkling light, Du. turen, Bav. zwiren, to spy. MHG. zwiren, to wink, to glance, was proverbially used as synonymous with zwinken. Ich zwiere swâ man zwinket wider mich : I twire at him who twinks at me. Zwinken soll gân zwieren gân : a twink shall go in return for a twire, tit for tat.

To Twirl. We have seen that the primary sense of twire was a twittering sound. The word representing sound is then applied to movement of analogous nature, as in E. twitter, to tremble ; Swiss zwitschern, zwitzern, properly to twitter, then to flicker. Moreover, terms signifying a vibrating or reciprocating movement are commonly applied also to the idea of whirling or turning round, as in Lat. vibrati crines, curled hair. Thus from whir representing a rapid vibratory sound are formed G. wirbel, Sw. hvirfwel, E. whirl, what turns rapidly round, Du. wervel, what is shot to and fro, the bolt of a door, or what turns round, as a whirlwind, whirlpool ; and from the same imitative syllable strengthened by a dental initial are formed Pl.D. zwirken, to chirp, twitter ; Fris. twierren, to whirl ; twierre, twierrewijn, a whirlwind (Epkema) ; Du. dwarling, dwarlwind, a whirlwind; MHG. twirel, twirl, what turns rapidly round; twâren, to turn round, to bore ; Swiss zwirlen, zwirrlen, to twirl ; Bav. zweren, to stir ; zwirel, zwirl, a stirrer; zwireln, zwirbeln, to stir, turn round, twirl.

Twist. Used in many senses, all ultimately referable to the numeral two. Thus Du. twisten, like twijnen, to twine, is to double or unite two threads, duplicare, retorquere fila.—Kil. Da. dial, twiste garn, to double thread. On the other hand, twist signifies separation or division in two parts, in Du. twist, G. zwist, discord, quarrel; of which the analysis is Twist dealt by the fuller synonym zwiespalt, division in two. Chaucer uses twist for the twig of a tree, and it is provincially used for the fork of the body, the part where the body forks in two. Bav. zwiset, the fork of the body or of a tree. ' Im schnee stehen bis an die zwisel:' to stand in snow up to the twist. MHG. zweien signifies either to unite two things together, or to separate in two. Gezweiter bruoder, a half-brother ; zweien, hostility, discord.

To Twit. The Goth. idweitjan, AS. edwitan, atwitan, to reproach, reprove, took the form of atwyte in OE. This louerd—set his wif forth, fot-hot, And hire misdedes hire atwote.
Seven Sages, 1687.
ON. vita, to reprove, blame, punish, fine ; viti, punishment, penalty.

To Twitch.—Tweak, G. zwicken, to pluck, pinch, nip; zucken, to make a quick, sudden movement, to whip out a sword ; Pl.D. tukken, to twitch, to pluck; dat oge tukket mi, my eye winks ; tokken, to pluck, to pull. E. dial, twick, a sudden jerk.
It would seem that the root twik, twitch, like the nasalised zwink, originally represented a sharp short sound, and then, with the usual transference from the signification of sound to that of movement, was applied to a sharp light movement, G. quieken, quietschen, to squeak; E. quitch, to flinch (Hal.) ; Bav. quickezen, zwickezen, to squeak, twitter; Pl.D. zwikkern, to run about like a mouse ; ut un in zwikkern, to slip out and in ; zwiklok, a loophole, a way of escape. See Twinkle, Twitter.

Twitter. In the first instance a sharp, broken sound, like the notes of a little bird ; then a tremulous movement. ' To be all in a twitter.' So we have G. zwitschern, to twitter ; Swiss zwitschern, zwitzern, to flicker ; Bav. zwitzern, to gnash the teeth, to tremble, wink, twinkle ; Swiss zwitzizwatz, a person of inconstant disposition. E. twitterlight, uncertain light, twilight.

Two.—Twain. AS. twa, twegen, G. zwey, zwo, zween. Da. to, tvende; Gr. δύο, Russ. dwa, Sanscr. dvau.

Tyke. ON. tik, a bitch.

Type.—Typical. Gr. τύπτω, to strike ; τύπος, a blow, a stamp, print, mark, thence a mould or pattern.

Typhus. Gr. τύφος, smoke, mist, and met. the clouding of the intellect, stupor from fever.

Tyrant. Lat. tyrannus, Gr. τύραννος.
Tyro. Lat. tyro, a newly-made soldier.

Thews, manners. Written thedys in the Manuel des Pecches.
That time were here many thedys, Many usages in many thedys.—v. 10564.

This may indicate an origin in AS. theod, ON. thjoð, Fris. djoe, people; Lett. tauta, people, race, kind. Illyrian csud, dis-position of a man; O Slav. schtoud, τρόπος, mos. The G. art signifies race, kind, nature, quality, manner, manners.—Pott, Würz. Wtb. 799.

Ubiquity. Lat. ubique, everywhere.
Udder. OHG. utar, G. euter, ON. jugr, jufr, Da. yver, Gr. οὖθαρ, Lat. uber.
Ugh! An interjection representing the sound made by an utterance during the moment of shudder, and consequently expressing any affection accompanied by shudder: cold, horror, repugnance. G. hu! exclamation of shudder, horror, fright, cold. Hu! ich erschrak. Hu! wie kalt. Huh, wie der Teufel grimmig!—Sanders.
Ugly. From the interj. ugh! arose Du. huggeren, to shiver (K.); ON. ugga, to fear, to doubt; uggr, fright, anxiety; OE. ug, houge, to shudder at, feel horror, dread, fear. To hug, or ug, abominari, detestari, fastidire, horrere.—Cath. Ang. Uggely, horridus, horribilis.—Pr. Pm.
For tha paynes are swa fel and hard—That ilk man may ugge, bathe yhunge and alde That heres tham be reherced and talde.
Hampole, Prick of Conscience, 6619.
From ON. ugga are formed uggligr, frightful, alarming, and uggsamr, fearful, timid; and OE. uglike or ugly had formerly the sense of horrible. Speaking of Hell, the Prick of Conscience says that—swylk filthe and stynk es in that ugly hole That nan erthely man might it thole.—l. 6683.
' An uglike snake.' Morris, Story of Genesis, 2805.
In modern speech the meaning is softened down to signify what is displeasing to the eye, but we still use frightful for the ex-cess of ugliness, and the tendency of the quality in the extreme to produce a shud-der is recognised in such a passage as, ' Ugh! the odious ugly fellow.'—Countess of St Alban's.
Ulcer. Lat. ulcus, ulceris.
Ullage. Among gaugers, what a cask wants of being full.—B. Properly the quantity required to fill it up. Fr. ullage, remplissage; uillier, to fill up to the bunghole.—Roquef. Olier, ouiller, to fill to the brim, to swill with drink.—Onofrio. Gloss. Lyonnais. In the S. of Fr. when the flask is nearly full they add a little oil to prevent evaporation, so that to oil the flask is equivalent to filling it to the brim. In Provence oliar signifies to anoint with oil, and also to fill up a cask.
Ulterior.—Ultimate. Lat. ultra, be-yond, ulterior, further, ultimus, furthest or last. Perhaps the root of the prep.-ultra may be preserved in W. ol, footstep, trace, and thence the hinder part, behind, after, hindmost. Troi yn ol, to turn back; olaf the furthest back, hindmost, last. When I speak to a person facing me, what is ultra or beyond him is behind him, towards his footsteps. Compare E. last with AS. last, footstep.
Umbrage. Fr. ombrage, a shade, a shadow, also jealousy, suspicion, an ink-ling of, whence donner ombrage à, to dis-content, make jealous of, or put buzzes into the head of; ombrageux, suspicious, giddy, skittish, starting at every feather.—Cot. It. ombrare, to give a shadow, by met. to startle for fear, as if it were at a shadow.—Fl. A shadow is taken as a slight intimation of what is in the back-ground. The metaphor is widely spread. Mod.Gr. σκιάζω, to shade, to frighten; σκιάζομαι, to be afraid; W. ysgod, shadow; ysgodigau, to start as a horse, to be affrighted.
Umpire. A third person chosen to decide a controversy left to arbitration, in case the arbitrators should disagree.—B. This is one of the cases like apron, auger, where the formation of the word is obscured by the loss of an initial n. It was formerly written nompeir, from OFr. nompair (non par), uneven, odd. In Piers Plowman, when it had been agreed to appoint arbitrators to appraise a bar-gain, Two risen rapelich and rounede togeders And preysed the penyworthes apart by hemselve—Thei couthe not by here conscience accord for treuthe,

Till Robyn the ropere aryse thei bysouhte, And nempned hym a nompeyr that no dispute were.
Nowmpere or owmpere, arbiter, se-quester.—Pr. Pm.
Uncle. Fr. oncle, oncle, Lat. avun-culus.
Uncouth. Strange, awkward. Un-cowth, extraneus, exoticus.—Pr. Pm. AS. cuth, G. kund, known; AS. cunnan, Du. konnen, to know. Sc. couth, couthy, agreeable in conversation, loving, kind, comfortable, pleasant. E. dial. unkid, un-kard, lonely, dreary, awkward, strange, inconvenient, ugly.—Hal.
Unction.—Unguent. Lat. unguo or ungo, unctum, to anoint, besmear.
Under. Goth. undar, G. unter, under, unten, below, Sanscr. antar, Lat. inter, among, within.
Undulation. -und-. -ound. Lat. unda, a wave, water in motion; undo, -as, to boil, to surge; abundo, to over-flow, to be in excessive quantity; inundo, to flow upon, to inundate; redundo, to flow back upon, to overflow, abound; un-dulatus, wavy, like watered silks. Lith. wanda, -dens; Lett. udens, water. See Water.
Uni-. Lat. unus, one.
Unison. Lat. unus, one, and sonus, sound.
Unit.—Unite.—Union. Lat. unio, unitum, to make one; unitas, oneness, unity, an unit in arithmetic.
Universal. Lat. universus, all with-out exception; unus and verso, to turn over.
Up.—Over. ON. upp, Pl.D. up, uff, op; G. auf, über, over, on, upon; Lat. super, upon; sub, under. Gr. ὑπέρ, upon, ὑπό, under. Goth. jup, up; uf, under; ufar, over.
To Upbraid. AS. upgebredan, expro-brare, to cry out upon. See To Bray.
Upholsterer. A corruption of up-holder. The original meaning seems to be one who furbishes up old goods. Up-holster, fripier.—Palsgr. Caxton in the Booke for Travellers gives 'Upholdsters, vieswariers [viesware, fripperie; vies-warier, fripier, raccomodeur, vendeur de vieux habits et d'autres vieilles choses.—Roquef]. Everard the upholster can well stoppe (estoupper) a mantel holed full agayn, carde agayn, skowre agayn a goune and all olde things.'—Pr. Pm. note. Upholdere, that sellythe smal thynges, velaber.—Pr. Pm. An upholder then was pretty much what we now call a broker, and we can easily understand how the name came to signify a dealer in furniture, and then a maker of furniture.
Uproar. Du. oproer, a tumult, sedi-tion; G. aufruhr, disturbance, commo-tion; rühren, AS. hreran, ON. hrara, to move, agitate, stir.
Upsidedown. For up-so-down, up what was down. Upsedown, up so down, eversus, subversus.—Pr. Pm.
Thare is na state of thare style that standis con-tent—All wald have up that is down, Welterit the went.—D. V. 239. 20.
Urcheon. Urchone, hérisson. Irchen, a lytell beest full of prickes, herison.—Palsgr. Rouchi hirchon, hurchon, Lat. ericius, a hedgehog.
Doubtless the Fr. hérisson is from hérisser, to set up his bristles, to make his hair to stare; se hérisser, his hair to stare; also to shiver or earne through fear.—Cot. It. riccio, crisped, curled, frizzled, hairy, rough; and as a noun, certain prickly or shaggy things, the prickly husk of a chest-nut, a hedgehog or porcupine; arricciare, to curl, frizzle; also for a man's hair to bristle and stand on end through sudden fear.—Fl. Sp. erizar, to set on end, to bristle; erizo, hedgehog, husk of chest-nut; rizo, frizzled, curled, cut velvet.
It is common to derive the foregoing forms from Lat. ericius, leaving the latter unexplained. It is more likely that the derivation runs in the opposite direction. The hair standing on end is an incident of the shuddering or shivering produced by cold or horror. Thus Fr. se hérisser, and It. arricciarsi drive on to gricciare, to shiver, to chill, and chatter with one's teeth, and with Gr. φρίσσω, to shudder, shiver, bristle, stand on end; φριξόκομης, with bristling hair. See Caprice, Frizzle.
Possibly however the name urcheon or hurchon may not really be taken from Fr. hérisson, but from the habit of the animal of rolling itself into a ball. Fris. horcken, to shrug for cold.—Kil. Pl.D. hurken, to crouch down. To hurk over the fire.—Mrs Baker. To hurch, to cud-dle.—Hal.
Ure. See Enure.
Urge.—Urgent. Lat. urgeo.
Urine. Lat. urina, from Gr. οὐρέω, to make water.
Urn. Lat. urna.
Use. Use, as employed in legal instru-ments in the sense of profit, benefit, is not to be confounded with use, from Lat. usus. The word in the former sense is from Lat. opus, need, and was formerly written oeps, oes.

Ceste nos plaist, ceste voluns Que à ton oes la saississons. Chron. des dues de Norm. 3185.
A mon oes je chante e à mon oes flaujol : according to my pleasure I sing and flute.—Rayn. E l'um asist une chaëre al oes la dame—Livre des Rois : they set a chair for the use of the lady. Item jeo devys à ma femme tout mon hostilment, vessel d'argent, masers, &c., a tener a son propre oes.—Will of Sir W. de Mowbray, Testam. Eborac.
Au diner le donez de oefs E les atyret à soun oues. Bibelesworth, 150.
Use. — Usage. — Usual, — Utensil.

Lat. utor, usus sum, to enjoy, have the benefit of, be conversant with.
Usher. It. usciere, Lat. ostiarius, Fr. huissier, door-keeper, from uscio, ostium, huis, a door.
Usquebaugh. Gael. uisge-beatha, literally water of life, Fr. eau de vie.
Usury. Lat. usura, use, occupation ; interest given for the use of money.
Utility. Lat. utilis, useful ; utor, I use.
Utter. AS. ut, out ; uter, outer, utter, extreme. Wurpath on tha utteran thystro : ejicite in extremas tenebras. To utter is to send out.

Vacant. — Vacate. — Vacuum. Lat. vacare, to be empty, vacuus, empty.
Vaccinate. Lat. vacca, a cow.
Vacillate. Lat. vacillo (the equivalent of E. waggle), to totter, waver.
-vade, -vas-. Lat. vado, vasum, to go. As in Invade, Evasion.
Vagabond.—Vagrant.—Vague. Lat. vagor, to rove or wander ; vagus, moving up and down, wandering, inconstant.
Vagary, Fegary, a whim, freak, toy. —Forby. Sc. figmaleery, whigmaleery, whim, fancy, crotchets.—Gl. Burns. Fr. lafaridondon is the burden of a song, representing the notes of the musical accompaniment. G. larifari, syllables without sense ; nonsense ! fiddlededee ! fiddle-faddle ! 'Larifari mit feindlichen truppen'—fiddlededee with your hostile troops. From nonsensical words to senseless thoughts, unreasonable fancies, is an easy step. Comp. fad, a whim, from fiddle-faddle.
-vail, -val-. Lat. valeo, to be well, to be strong ; as in Avail, Prevalent, &c.
Vain.—Vanity.—Vanish. Fr. vain, Lat. vanus, empty, ineffectual ; -vanesco, to vanish or come to nought.
Valance. It. valenza, valenzana, say or serge for bed-curtains or valences; valenzane da letto, valences for a bed.—Fl.
Supposed to be from the stuff having been made at Valencia or Valence. Chaucer speaks of a 'kerchief of Valence.'
Vale.—Valley. Lat. vallis, Fr. val.
Valet.—Vassal. As Lat. puer, a boy, received the subsidiary sense of servant, so w. gwas signifies a youth, a young man, a servant, whence gwasawl, serving. From gwas arose Mid. Lat. vassus, a man, a retainer, a vassal; and vassal is used in the Livre des Rois for vir (pp. 119, 204), for pugnator (p. 174).—Diez. We may remember that the performance of homage or recognition of vassalage was made in the words, devenio vester homo. We then pass to the dim. OFr. vaslet, varlet, a boy, whence Fr. valet, E. varlet, valet, a servant. Bel-acueil, in the R. R., is introduced as 'ung varlet bel et advenant,' which Chaucer translates 'a lusty bachilere.' The Liber Albus uses the term in the sense of a minor : 'de vallettis et puellis qui sunt in custodiâ regis, in cujus custodia sint, et quantum valeant terras illorum.'—I. 117. In Walloon a man still says that his wife is brought to bed au petit valet, of a little boy.—Remacle.
Valetudinarian. Lat. valetudo, health, good or bad ; valetudinarius, subject to sickness or often sick.
Valiant,—Valid. —Valour, —Value. Lat. valeo, Fr. valoir, to be sound, to be of worth ; OFr. valur, valor, value, worth, and thence courage, as the quality most prized in a man ; vaillant, worthy, courageous.
Valve. Lat. valvæ, folding doors.
Vamp. The upper leather of a shoe. Vampey of a hose, avant pied.—Palsgr. To vamp up, properly to put a new upper leather, to furbish up.
Van. I. The front of an army; Fr. avant, before, from Lat. ab ante.

2. A carriage for furniture, &c., cur-tailed from caravan, a conveyance for a wildbeast or other show, a carriage that serves the purpose of a dwelling-place.
Vane. A weathercock, properly a streamer. AS. fana, Du. vaene, G. fahne, a flag or standard ; OHG. fano, a cloth, a flag, Goth. fana, cloth, a cloth or napkin. Lat. pannus, cloth.
Vanish. See Vain.
Vapid. Lat. vappa, palled wine; vapidus, flat, dull, musty, ill-tasted.
Vapour. Lat. vapor, exhalation, steam. Gr. καπνος, breath, exhalation, smell.
Various.—Variety.—To Vary. Lat. varius, of different colours, of different natures ; vario, to vary, alter, change.
Varlet. See Valet.
Varnish. It. vernice, Fr. vernis, Sp. berniz. Menage derives Fr. vernir, to varnish, from a Lat. vitrinire, to glaze. The Prov. has veirin, from vitreus. It seems to me more probable that it is from Gr. βερωνικη, βερνικη, amber, applied by Agapias to sandarach, a gum rosin similar in appearance to amber, of which varnish was made ; βερνικιάζω, to varnish.—Du-cange, Gl. Gr. ModGr. βερνικι, varnish.
Vase.—Vessel.—Vascular. Lat. vas, Fr. vase, a hollow implement for holding liquids. From the dim. vasculum is formed Fr. vascel, vaissel, vaisseau, a vessel. Vascular, composed of vessels or containing vessels.
Vast. -vast-. Lat. vastus, huge, wide, uninhabited, waste ; vasto, to devastate, lay waste.
Vat. AS. fat, Du. vat, G. fass, gefass, Lat. vas, a tub, vessel, implement for hold-ing liquids. G. fassen, Du. vatten, to hold, to contain. Compare rummer, a large glass, from Da. rumme, to contain; can, a vessel, from W. cannu, to contain.
Vault. It. volta, a turn, a turning round or about, a round walk, a going round, an arched vault or roof—Fl.; volgere, Lat. volvere, to turn.
To Vault. Fr. volte, a round or turn, and thence the bounding turn which cun-ning riders teach their horses ; also a tumbler's gambol or turn ; volter, to vault or tumble, to bound or curvet ; also to turn or make turn. It. volgere, volsi, volto, to turn ; voltare, to turn.
To Vaunt. It. vantare, Fr. vanter, from vanitare, used by Augustine in the sense of boast.—Diez. From vanus is formed Prov. van, empty, vain ; vanar, vantar, to boast ; vanaire, boaster ; van-ansa, boast. ' En Bertrand si s'vanava qu'el cuiava tan valer:' Sir B. boasted that he was of so great worth. Sp. vanidad, vanity, ostentation, vain parade; hacer vanidad, to boast of anything.
Veal.—Vellum. It. vitello, OFr. vedel, viel, Fr. veau, from Lat. vitulus, a calf. Thence Mid.Lat. vitulonium, Fr. velin, E. vellum, fine calfskin dressed like parchment for writing on.
Vedette. A sentinel on horseback detached to give notice of the enemy's designs.—B. Fr. vedette, a sentry or court of guard placed without a fort or camp, and generally any high place from which one may see afar off.—Cot. It. vedetta, a watch-tower, a sentinel's stand-ing-place, a peeping-hole.—Fl. Vedere to see, to view.
To Veer. Fr. virer, to veer, turn round, wheel or whirl about.—Cot. It. virare, to turn. Rouchi virler, to roll. In all probability from the same root with E. whirl, whether it directly descends from Lat. gyrare or not.
Vegetable.—Vegetate. Lat. vegeo, to grow ; vegetus, quick, lively, strong ; vegetabilis, that which grows, as herbs and trees.
Vehement. Lat. vehemens.
Vehicle. Lat. veho, to carry ; vehiculum, anything serving to carry.
Vein. Fr. veine, Lat. vena.
Vellum. See Veal.
Velvet. It. velluto, veluto, fleecy, nappy, shaggy, and thence the stuff vel-vet. From vello, Lat. vellus, a fleece. It is written velouette by Chaucer, velle-wet in John Russel's book of Nurture, 914.—Babees Book.
Venal.—Vend. Lat. veneo (venum eo), go to sale, be sold. Vendo (venum do), give to sale, sell.
-vene. -vent. Lat. venio, ventum, to come ; intervenio, to come between, to come in one's way. To contravene, to go against, to disobey. To circumvent, to come round one, to get the better of him.
Venerable—Venerate. Lat. veneror, to worship.
Vengeance, -venge.—Vindicate.—Vindictive. Lat. vindex, an asserter of rights, one who gives effect to the law, a punisher, avenger ; vindico, to avouch, maintain, carry into execution, punish ; vindicta, vengeance, defence, maintenance. Prov. vengar, venjar. It. vengiare, Fr. venger. Scheler compares Fr. manger, from Lat. manducare, manducare.
Venial. Lat. venia, allowance, pardon.
Venison. Fr. venaison, Lat. venatio, he chase, or the produce of it; *venor, atus sum*, to hunt. **Venom.** Fr. *venin*, OFr. *venim*, Lat. *venenum*, poison.

**Vent.** Air, wind, or passage out of a vessel.—B. Fr. *vent*, Lat. *ventus*, wind.

**Ventilate.** Lat. *ventus*, the wind; *ventilo*, to winnow, to expose to the air.

**Ventral.** Lat. *venter, -tris*, the belly.

**Venture.** See **Adventure.**

**Venue.** In Law, the neighbourhood in which a wrong is committed and in which it should be tried. Mid.Lat. *vicinetum, visnetum*, Norm. *vesini, visnet*, OFr. *visnage*, neighbourhood.—Roquef. *Et sciendum est quod hi sex viri eligentur de visneto quo talis accusatus manserit.— Lib. Albus*, 58.

**Veracious.—Verity.—Verify.** Lat. *verus*, true; *Veritas*, truth; *verax*, dis- posed to truth, veracious.

**Verandah.** Ptg. *varanda*, a balcony, terrace, probably an Indian word from Sanscr. *varanda*, a portico.

**Verb.** Lat. *verbum*, corresponding to E. word as Lat. *barba* to E. *beard*.

**Verdant.—Verderor.** Lat. *viridis*, Fr. *vert*, green; *viridans*, Fr. *verdoyant*, verdant, green. The verderors were the officers of a forest who had care of the underwood, the green hue (Fr. *vert*) as it was called in the statutes.

**Verdict.** Lat. *vere dictum*, truly said.

**Verdigris.—Verditer.** Fr. *verderis, verd-de-gris, verdigrease*.—Cot. Cor- rupted from Lat. *viride æris*, green of brass.

**Verditer,** Fr. *verd-de-terre* (G. *erdgrün*, earth-green), a kind of green mineral chalk.—Cot.

**Verge.—Verger.** Fr. *verge* (Lat. *virga*), a rod or twig, the wand borne by an officer as sign of his authority, whence verger, a wand-bearer, a petty officer in courts and churches.
The verge of the court was the limits within which the authority of the officers of the court extended. Sp. *vara*, rod, wand, mace, carried as an emblem of au- thority; and met. the jurisdiction of which it is an emblem. The Mod.Gr. *ῥάβδος*, a stick, mace, sceptre, or sign of authority, is used in the same metaphor- ical way for authority or command.
Fr. *verge* is also a plain hoop ring or wedding ring, and thence the verge or balance-wheel in a watch, distinguished from the others by the absence of cogs.

**To Verge, -verge.** Lat. *vergo, ver- sum*, to pour out, to decline or bow to, to lie towards. Verge in the sense of bound or limit is that to which we verge or tend.

**Verjuice.** The juice of sour and unripe grapes, crabs, &c.—B. Fr. *verjus, vert jus*, juice of green fruit.

**Vermicelli.** It. *vermicelli*, paste made in the form of worms or thin strings; Lat. *vermis*, a worm.

**Vermilion.** It. *vermiglio*, Mid.Lat. *ver- miculus*, scarlet, red, from the worm of the gall-nut from which red was dyed. The Turkish name of the gall-nut, *kermes* (from whence *kirmizi*, crimson), is said to be from Sanscrit *krimi*, a worm.

**Vermin.** Fr. *vermine*, any kind of disgusting or hurtful creatures of small size. Lat. *vermis*, worm.

**Vernacular.** Lat. *verna*, a slave born in the house; *vernaculus*, that is born in one's house, that belongs to one's native country.

**Vernal.** Lat. *vernalis*, belonging to (*ver*) the Spring.

**Verse, -verse, -vert.** Lat. *verto, versum*, to turn, gives rise to numerous compounds, as **Avert, Convert, Diverse, Perverse,** &c., and other derivatives. *Versus, -us*, a turning at a land's end, hence a row, a verse, a line. The fre- quentative form is *verso*, to turn about, to turn over and over, whence **Versatile,** apt to turn about; **Converse,** &c.

**Vertebra.** Lat. *vertebra*, a joint that turns; *verto*, to turn.

**Vertex.—Vertical.** Lat. *vertex*, a whirlpool, the crown of the head where the hair turns round like a whirlpool, and thence the top of anything. **Vertical,** directly above the head. See **Verse.**

**Very.—Verily.** Formerly *verray*, from Fr. *vrai*. The *valow verray*, the true value, full value.—R. Brunne, 163. *Verray pilgryn.—Ibid.*, 189.
'Lord Jhesu,' he said, 'also verrayly As my luf is on the laid.'—Ib. 102.
And this is *euerlastynge lyf* that thei knowe thee *verrei God alone*.—Wiclif, Jon. 17. Very God of very God.— Athanasian Creed.

**Vesicle.** Lat. *vesicula*, dim. of *vesica*, a bladder.
**Vessel.** See **Vase.**
**Vest. -vest.** Lat. *vestis*, a garment. Hence **Invest,** to clothe; **Devest,** to un- clothe.
**Vestibule.** Lat. *vestibulum*, a porch or entry to a house.
**Vestige.** Lat. *vestigium*, the print of a foot, a trace.

**Vestry.** The apartment where the garments for the service of a church are kept. Lat. vestiarium, a wardrobe, from vestis, a garment.
Vetch. Lat. vicia, It. veccia.
Veteran. Lat. vetus, -eris, old; veteranus, one that has served long in a place, an old soldier.
Veterinary. Lat. veterina bestia, a beast of burden, a draught animal.
Vex. Lat. vexo (a freq. of veho, vexi, to carry), to toss about, to disquiet, afflict, harass.
Viands. Provisions. Fr. viande, meat, formerly provisions in general, from Lat. vivenda. 'Et nous requiesmes que on nous donnast la viande:' and we asked that one might give us something to eat. 'Les viandes qu'ils nous donnèrent, ce furent beguets de fourmages qui estoient roties au soleil—et œfs durs cuis de quatres jours ou de cinq:' the viands which they gave us were cheesecakes roasted in the sun, and hard eggs four or five days old.—Joinville.
Vibrate. Lat. vibro, to quiver, to glitter, to frizzle or ruffle.
Vicar.—Vicissitude. See Vice-.
Vice-. Lat. vicis, a turn, and thence office, duty, place, room, stead. Vice, instead of; vicarius, one who fills the place of another, a deputy; vicissim, by turns, one after the other; vicissitude, a succeeding in turns.
Vice. A movable arm capable of being screwed up to a solid support for the purpose of holding fast an object on which one is at work. Also the newel or spindle of a winding staircase. From Fr. vis, a screw, a winding stair. The implement takes its name from comparison to the tendril of a vine. It. vite, a vine, also a winding screw; vite-femina, a female screw; vitare, visser, to screw with a vice.—Fl.
Vicious.—Vitiate. Lat. vitium, a fault, vice; vitiare, to corrupt.
Vicinity. Lat. vicus, a village, a street; vicinus, one who inhabits the same village, a neighbour.
-vict. -vince. Lat. vinco, victum, to conquer, overcome; convince, to vanquish in argument, to baffle, refute, convince; evinco, to recover by law. To evince is to establish in a convincing manner, to make manifest, to display.
Victim. Lat. victima, a beast killed in sacrifice.
Victory. Lat. victoria; vinco, victum, to conquer.
Victuals. Lat. victus, food, support of life, from vivo, victum, to live.
To Vie. To emulate, to compete with.
VILLAIN To vye who might sleepe best.—Chaucer. 'It is a metaphor taken from the language of gamesters, with whom It. invitare, Prov. envidar, enviar, Fr. envier, was to invite or propose to throw for certain stakes, and renvier, to revie, for the adversary to propose certain stakes in return. Quum facio invitum, facias quoque, Balde, revitum.—Merl. Cocc. in Rayn. 'Il y renvioit de sa reste:' he set his whole rest, he adventured all his estate upon it.—Cot. Invitare, to invite to do anything, to vie at play; invito, an inviting, a vie or vying at play.—Fl. Invitare is explained by La Crusca, to name the stakes or amount for which one proposes to play. OFr. envier was used in the original sense of inviting as well as in the secondary one of vying at play. 'Entre ces ki furent al convivie enviez;' among those who were invited to the feast.—L. des Rois. From the verb was formed the adverbial expression à l'envi, OE. a-vie, as if for a wager, a qui mieux mieux. 'They that write of these toads strive a-vie who shall write most wonders of them.'—Holland, Pliny.
View. Lat. videre, to see, became in It. vedere, veduto; in Fr. veder, veer, veier, veoir, voir; whence It. veduta, Fr. veue, vue, sight or view.
Vigil.—Vigilant. Lat. vigil, wakeful, waking, watchful; vigilans, watching, awake; vigilia, a watch by night, the eve before a feast. Probably from the same root with E. wake.
Vignette. Fr. vignette, from vigne, Lat. vinea; 'the first vignettes represented vine-leaves and clusters of grapes.'—Scheler.
Vigour. Lat. vigor; vigeo, to be strong.
Vile. Lat. vilis, of little worth.
Villa.—Village. Lat. villa, a country- or farm-house, a farm.
Villain. Mid.Lat. villani were the inhabitants of villæ, hamlets or country estates, peasants, or rustics, and the name was specifically applied to the serfs or peasants who were bound to till their lord's estate, and were sold with the land. 'Ipse quoque terram et villanos et omnes consuetudines de ipsis villanis in vico Silvatico concessit.'—Orderic. Vital. in Duc. The supreme contempt in which the peasants were held under the feudal system led to the bad sense of the word in modern language. Fr. vilain, a churl, boor, clown, and a knave, rascal, filthy fellow; as an adj. vile, base, sordid, bad.—Cot.
To Vindicate. — Vindictive. See Vengeance.
Vine. — Vinous. — Vintage. Lat. vinum, wine; vinea, the tree from whose fruit it is made, a vine; vindemia, Prov. vendenha, Fr. vendange, the vintage or gathering of the wine harvest.
Vinegar. Fr. vin aigre, sour wine.
Vinewed. Mouldy. See Fenewed.
Viol. — Violin. Mid-Lat. vitula, vidula, Prov. viula, It. viola, violone, violino, OHG. fidula (Otfried), O. fiedel, Du. vedele, vele (Kil.), a fiddle or stringed instrument. Diez derives vitula, as the instrument of merry-making, from Lat. vitulari, properly to leap like a calf, then to be joyous or merry. But see Fiddle.
Violate. — Violent. Lat. vis, force; violo, -as, to use force with, to wrong.
Violet. Fr. violette, Lat. viola.
Viper. Lat. vipera, for vivipera (from vivus and pario, to bring forth), because supposed to produce its young alive, and not, as other snakes, in the shape of eggs.
Virgin. Lat. virgo, -inis.
Virtue. Lat. virtus, -utis (from vir, a man), the especial character of a man as opposed to woman, courage, strength, power, merit, worth.
Virulent. Lat. virus, a strong disagreeable smell, venom, poison; virulentus, venomous, poisonous.
Visage. — Vision. — Visible. — Visor. Lat. video, visum, to see; visio, a seeing, a vision; visus, a sight, look, view. From visus are OFr. vis, and thence Fr. visage, the face, countenance; visière, the viser or sight of a helmet (Cot.); It. visiera, a pair of spectacles or anything to see through.—Fl. The word was variously written in E. visor, visar, visard, and was applied to a mask or cover for the face. It. visaruola, a mask.
Viscid. — Viscous. Lat. viscus, bird-lime, glue; viscidus, sticky.
Visit. From Lat. video, visum, to see, are formed the frequentatives viso and visito, to go to see, to visit.
Vital. — Vivid. — Vivacious. Lat. vivo, victum, to live; vita, life. Probably from the same ultimate source with E. quick, whick, living.
Vitreous. Lat. vitrum, glass.
Vitriol. Said to be named from its vitreous or glassy substance.
Vituperate. Lat. vituperare, to blame, find fault with.

Vivacious. — Vivid. See Vital.
Vixen. Formerly fixen, of which Verstegan says: 'this is the name of the she-fox, otherwise and more anciently foxin. It is in reproach applied to a woman whose nature and condition is thereby compared to a she-fox.'—Restitution of decayed Intelligence in N. & Q., Nov. 14, 1863. G. füchsin, a she-fox.
Vizard. See Visage.
Vocal. — Vocabulary. — Vocation. —voke. Lat. voco, -as, to call; vox, vocis, a voice, sound, word; vocabulum, a word. To convoke, to call together; revoke, to call back, &c. Vociferor (voci and fero), to raise the voice, to shout.
Vogue. Fr. vogue, course of a ship; and fig. course, sway: avoir la vogue, être en vogue, Sp. estar en boga, to be current or fashionable, to have sway. It. vogare, Sp. bogar, to row or pull at an oar; Fr. voguer, to sail forth. Am rems et am vela s'en van a mays vogar: with oars and sails they sail away.—Rayn. From OHG. wagôn, MHG. wagen, to be in motion, to move; in wago wesan, être en vogue.—Diez. Sach uf den ünden wagen ein schif: saw a ship move on the waves.—Müller. Darna anno 1527, 28, wagen se it mit smaksegel in Scotland, Norwegen, &c.—Hamburgische Chroniken.—they sailed with a smacksail to Scotland, &c.
Voice. Fr. voix, It. voce, Lat. vox, vocis. See Vocal.
Void. It. vuoto, voto, empty, hollow, concave; Fr. vuide, void, empty, waste, vast, wide.—Cot. Prov. voig, vuei, empty; voidar, voyar, vuiar, to empty; Rouchi wite, empty; wider, to empty, void, quit. Diez' derivation of Fr. vuide, vide, from Lat. viduus, seems far less probable than the view which regards it as an equivalent of G. weit, E. wide. OHG. wît, amplus, latus, largus, procerus, vastus, vacuus. Dero uuitun uuuasti, vastæ solitudini, to the wide waste. Uuit weg, spatiosa via. Diu uuita luft, aeria latitudo. The ideas of emptiness and space are closely connected. Space is room to move in, and it implies the absence of what would fill it up. Thus waste, empty, is radically identical with vast, spacious, and in the same way void, empty, is identical with wide, spacious.
Volatile. Lat. volo, -as, to fly; volatilis, that flies, flitting, passing swiftly.
Volcano. It. volcano, from Lat. Vulcanus, the God of fire.
Volition. — Voluntary. Lat. volo, vis, to be willing, to will; voluntas, the will.

VOLLEY. Volley. Lat. volo. It. volare, to fly; volata, Fr. volée, a flight, a number of things flying at one time.
Volume.—Voluble, -volve. -volu-tion. Lat. volvo, volutum, to roll, turn over, whence volubilis, rolling, turning about; volumen, a roll of writing, a volume, a bundle of anything wrapt up together.
Voluptuous. Lat. voluptas, sensual pleasure.
Vomit. Lat. vomo, vomitum.
Voracious.—Devour. Lat. voro, to eat greedily; vorax, inclined to eat greedily, ravenous.
Vote.—Votary.—Devote. Lat. voveo, votum, to wish for, then to promise something for the sake of obtaining the object of desire, to devote or consecrate; votum, a wish, a vow or promise made to the Deity. A vote is the expression of our choice or wish for a particular alternative.
To Vouch.—Vouchsafe. Lat. vocare, OFr. voucher, in Law, was when the person whose possession was attacked called upon a third person to stand in his shoes and defend his right. Then in a secondary sense, to vouch for one is to answer to the call, to give your own guarantee for the matter in dispute.
To vouchsafe, vocare salvum, is to warrant safe, to give sanction to, to assure, and thence to deign, to condescend.
Of merchandie the sevent penie to have Unto his tresorie the Barons vouched sauve. R. Brunne, 283.
Again, when K. Edward sent messengers to France to renounce his fealty for Gascony, K. Philip sent answer, Homage up to yield, lordschip to forsake, So Edward it willed, on that wise we it take, As ye have made present, the kyng vouches it sauve,—the king gives his sanction to the condition.
Paroles ke sunt dites, de terres resigner, Des homages rendre, de seygnour refuser, Le reis Phelipp resceyt en meme la maner. R. Brunne, 260.
Vow. Fr. vœu, Lat. votum. See Vote.
Vowel. Fr. voyelle. It. vocale, Lat. vocalis, of or pertaining to the voice.
Voyage. Fr. voyage. It. viaggio, Prov. viatge, Walach. viadi, a journey, from Lat. viaticum, journey money, used by Venantius Fortunatus in the modern sense.—Diez. The Lat. via became Fr. voie, way, whence envoyer, renvoyer, fourvoyer, &c.
Vulgar.—Divulge.—Vulgate. Lat. vulgus, the common people; vulgo, -as, to publish or spread abroad, to divulge, whence Vulgate, the version of the Scriptures in common use.
Vulnerary. Lat. vulnus, a wound, vulnerarius, of a wound.
-vulse. Lat. vello, vulsum, to pluck, pull, tug; convello, to pluck up, tear away, wrench, shatter. Revulsion, a tearing away, tearing back from.

To Wabble. —Waddle. — Waggle. These words all signify to sway to and fro, and are probably taken in the first instance from the rolling of water. To wobble, to bubble up, to reel, totter, roll about.—Hal. Potwobbler, one who boils a pot.—Grose. To wallop, which differs only in the transposition of the labial and liquid, is used primarily of the motion of boiling water, and then of any rolling movement: to wallop about, to roll about.—Hal. Bav. wabeln, to tattle, points in the same direction, the sense of loquaciousness being constantly expressed by the figure of splashing water. In the same dialect waiben, waibeln, to stagger, totter. Du. wapperen, to waver, dangle, flap, i.e. wappeltet, to rock as a boat; Esthon. Wabbisema, Fin. wapista, to shake, waver, tremble.
With the addition of an initial sibilant G. schwabbeln, schwappeln, schwappern, schwappen, to splash, dash like water, to wabble, waggle; schwabbeln, quabbeln, Swiss wabbeln, Pl.D. wabbeln, quabbeln, to shake like jelly or boggy ground.
In favour of a like origin of the form waddle may be cited OHG. wadalon, wadanon, fluctuare, vagari; Swab. watschnass, thoroughly wet, compared with G. watscheln, to waddle; Fr. gadiller, to paddle in the wet, to jog or stir up and down; vadrouille, a swabber, for sopping up the wet; and (with the sibilant initial) Du. swadderen, turbare aquas, fluctuare—K., Bav. schwadern, schwatzieln, to splash, Sc. swatter, squatter, to move quickly in any fluid, including the idea of undulatory motion, to move quickly in an awkward manner.—Jam.

WAD.—Wadding. A wad is a bundle or quantity of anything, a wisp of straw.—Hal. It is then applied to a bunch of clouts, tow or the like, used by gunners as a stopple and rammed down to keep the powder close. To wad a garment is to line it with flocks of cotton compacted together, and wadding is material prepared for that purpose. G. watte, Fr. ouate, wadding for lining.
Wad in Cumberland is the name given to black lead, a mineral found in detached lumps, and not, like other ores, in veins. Waddock, a large piece.—Hal.
The sense of a mass or separate portion, expressed by wad, as well as by swad or squad, is probably taken from the figure of splashing in the wet, when separate portions of mire are dashed off on all sides. Compare squad, (in Lincoln) sloppy dirt, (in Somerset) a group or company.—Hal. Swiss schwetti, a slop, so much as is spilt at once; then a heap, as of apples. The syllable wad is applied to the agitation of liquids in N. vada, vadda, vassa, to dabble in water, to chatter, tattle; vade ned, to spill, or slop. And it has been argued under Wabble that the radical meaning of waddle was of a similar nature. See also next Article.
To Wade. The root is common to the Latin and Teutonic stocks, signifying originally to splash, then to walk through water of some depth. Lat. vadus, wet; vadere, to wade; vadum, a shallow place, a ford. It. guado, a ford, a washpool or plash of water; Fr. gué, a ford; guéer, to wade; guéer un cheval, to wash a horse in a river; guéer du linge, to rinse linen.—Cot. G. im kothe waten, to walk in mud or dirt; Bav. wetten, Swiss schweeten, to swim or wash a horse in a river; Swab. wette, Bav., Swiss schwetti, a horsewash, a plash or puddle; Du. wed, a horsepond, a ford; wadde, a ford, a shallow; waden, to wade. N. vada, vadda, vassa, to wade in water, mud, or snow, to dabble, dirty, to chatter, tattle; (of a fish) to swim on the surface of water. Vad' ihop, to stir up; vade ned, to spill, slop.
The imitative force of the word is entirely lost in wade, and can only be made out by comparing it with fuller forms, as Pl.D. quatsken, to sound like water in the shoes, to dabble; It. guazzare, to dabble, plash, or trample in the water, to shake water in any vessel, to rinse; guazza, a plash or puddle of water; Illyrian gacati, gaziti, Magyar gázolni. to wade; gáz, a ford, a shallow; or Swiss schwadem, to move with a noise like liquids in a vase, to splash; Bav. schwatteln, to splash or spill over.
Wafer. Fr. gauffre, Du. waefel, G. waffel, Swiss waffle, a thin cake made by baking it between the round flat cheeks of a peculiar pair of tongs made for that purpose. Said to be from G. wabe, a honeycomb, which the crisscross marks on the surface of the wafer are supposed to resemble. It is much more probable that it is named from the wide-mouthed tongs by which it is made. G. waffel, Swiss waffle, signify the wide chops of a dog or any large mouth, as well as a wafer.
Reinhold indeed in the Henneb. Idioticon treats this last as the obvious derivation that must occur to every one, but rejects it on the vague supposition that the word is too ancient and too widely spread for such a derivation.
To Waft.—Waff.—Whiff. Sc. waff, waif, to blow.
Ane active bow apoun her schulder bare, As sche had bene ane wild huntreis, With wind waffing her haris lowsit of trace.
Closely allied to Sc: wauch, waucht, E. quaff, to drink in hearty draughts, or with a strong draught of breath. Other related forms are G. hauchen, to breathe, to blow; E. huff, whiff, all imitative of the sound.
The addition of the final t in E. waft probably indicates the formation of a substantive, and thence again of a secondary verb, as in Da. vift, a puff or breath of wind; vifte, Sw. wefta, to waft, fan, winnow, wave. Wefta på elden, to blow the fire; weft-offer, a wave-offering. To waft over, then, would be to convey over by a breath of wind. So we have sniff, snift, and Sc. wauch, waucht, above mentioned.
* Wag. A joker, one who plays tricks. Probably a curtailment of waghalter, one who is like to wag in a halter, a gallows-bird. 'I can tell you I am a mad waghalter.'—Marston. 'Let them beware of wagging in the galowes.'—Andrew Boorde, p. 84. A similar formation is seen in rake for rakehell, the scrapings of hell.
To Wag.—Waggle. We signify vibratory unsteady movement by the adverbial wiggle-waggle. Du. wiggelen, to shake; waggelen, to stagger, totter. N. vigga, to rock, to sway from side to side; wagga, to rock, and thence, a cradle.

Bav. wagen, wegen, to shake, move, to stir. Dem die zand wagen: he whose teeth are loose. Die Juden haubet: the Jews wagged their heads. Pl.D. wegen, wogen, to stir; Sc. waggle, wuggle, a quaking bog; G. wackeln, to wag, totter, joggle, shake, and with the nasal, wanken, Westerwald wankelen, to reel, waver, jog, rock. Lat. vacillare, to totter.

It has been argued under Wabble that the primitive application of all these forms was to the agitation of water, the sound of which they were intended to re-present. Thus we have E. dial. swiggle, to shake liquor violently, to move about in water, to rinse—Moor; G. schwänken, to move a fluid body to and fro, to rinse. OHG. wâg, abyss, waters, sea; G. woge, Fr. vague, billow, wave.

To Wage.—Wages.—Wager. The Lat. vas, vadis, a surety, corresponds to Goth. vadi, OHG. wetti, OFris. wed, Sc. wad, wed, a pledge, security, engagement, whether these were actually borrowed from the Lat. or not. Hence arose Mid. Lat. vadium, guadium, It. gaggio, Fr. gage, a pledge or surety, a stake at play. Fr. gages, wages, is money paid to a person as a pledge for his services. From vadium sprang the verb vadiare, Fr. gager, to give pledges, to lay down stakes. A wager is an occasion on which opposite alternatives are supported by two parties, and stakes are laid down to abide the issue of the event. The chronicle speaking of the emperor Frederic II., A.D. 1250, says, 'Veneno extinctus sepul-tus est—tam occultè quod multi per annos 40 vadiebant (wagered) eum vivere.'—Duc.

When a person under the Gothic Laws proceeded against another at law, his first step was to give a pledge that his cause was just, and that he would abide the de-cision of the court. This requisition was satisfied when the appeal to law took the shape of a challenge to judicial combat, by the challenger flinging down his glove in court, and the person challenged taking it up. The proceeding was signified by the term vadiare duellum, or wager of battle, and the same verb was extended to the analogous proceedings used on a solemn declaration of war, vadiare bel-lum; although there might here be no-thing in the nature of a pledge. In modern times we use the word wage for the carrying on of war, and not merely the commencement, and the connection with the idea of pledges is wholly obscured.

Waggon.—Wain. AS. wægen, wægn, OHG. wagan, ON. vagn, Bohem. wůz, Pol. woz, waggon, chariot, car. Sanscr. vahana, vaha, bearing, conveying, any vehicle, as a horse, a car; vah, carry, draw, bear, move; Lat. vehere, Bohem. wezti, to carry. Lith. wezù, weszti, to draw, convey, carry.

Waif.—To Waive. Mid.Lat. way-vium, OFr. gayve, a waif, was anything wandering at large, without an owner. 'Choses gayves sont qui ne sont appro-priées à nul usage de home, et qui sont trouvées, que nul ne reclame siennes.'—Consuetudo Norm. in Duc. 'Wayvium, quod nullus advocat.'—Fleta. 'There is ane other mouable escheit of any waif beist within the territorie of any lord, the quhilk suld be cryed upon the market dayes, &c.'—Jam. From waif is formed Mid.Lat. waiviare, OFr. guesver, to waive, to make a waif of or treat as a waif, to renounce the right of ownership; guesver l'héretage, to renounce the in-heritance.

The origin of the word is seen in Sc. waff, waif, to blow, to move to and fro, to fluctuate; waffie, wauingeour, a vaga-bond; to wawer, waver, to wander—Jam.; E. dial. wave, to wander or stray—Hal.; ON. váfa, vofa, to move to and fro, to waver. In like manner Lat. vagari, Fr. vaguer, to wander up and down, are connected with the root wag, signifying motion to and fro.

To Wail. To cry wae! as Fr. miau-ler, to cry miau! It. guai a me! woe is me! guaire, guaiare, guaiolare, to wail, to lament. Bret. gwela, W. wylo, to weep, lament. Fin. woi! vox querentis, væ! ah! woikata, woikailla (Sw. woja sig), to cry woi! to lament, wail; woiwoius, wail-ing. See Woe. Let. wai! Magy. jaj! oh! alas! Let. waideht, Magy. jajgatni, to groan, lament, wail.

Wain. See Waggon.

Wainscot. Pl.D. wagenschot, the best oak wood without knots.—Brem. Wtb. Du. waegheschot, oak boards, wood for cabinet work, from the light-coloured wavy lines (waeghe, wave) by which the grain of the wood is marked.—Kil. The second element of the word is Du. schot, schut, beschot, a closure or partition of boards; schutten, to prevent, hinder, keep off; schutten den wind, to keep out the wind; schutberd, thin board fit for partitions. The shutters of a window are for keeping out the weather. Another Du. name for wainscot is wandschot, from wand, wall, which leads us to suspect that the supposed reference to the wavy lines of wainscot may be an afterthought, and that the first element in Du. waegheschot, waeghenschot, may really be the Fris. waegh, wach, wage, AS. wag, wah, wall.
Waist.—Waistcoat. From W. gwasgu, to squeeze or press, is formed gwasg, the waist, the place where the body is squeezed in. Gwasgod, gwasgbais, a waistcoat. Gael. fáisg, Manx faast, to wring, press, squeeze.

To Wait.—Watch. From ON. waka, to wake, was formed vakta, to observe, watch, guard, tend. The corresponding forms are OHG. wahtên, to watch or keep awake, to keep guard; G. wache, watch, look out, guard; wacht, the guard; Du. waecke, wachte, watching, guard, and E. watch. NFris. wachtjen, exspectare.—Epkema. The stock was imported into the Romance languages, producing It. guatare, to watch, to spy, OFr. waiter, gaiter, guaiter, Fr. guetter, to observe, to watch; Wal. waiti, awaiti, to look, observe, spy; Lang. gach, gâcha, gaict, gaito, a watch or sentinel. Rouchi wéte un po, just look.
From Northern Fr. descended E. wait, to look, observe, be on the look out for, expect, remain until something happens, remain quiet, or observe, attend.
Beryn cleped a maryner and bad him sty on loft And weyie aftir our four shippis, aftir us doith dryve.—Beryn, 856.
—yet ferthermore he ridis And waytid on his right hond a Mancepilis plase.—Ib. 903.
Wayte, waker : vigil. Wayte, a spye : explorator. Waytyn or aspyyn : observo. Waytynge or aspyynge with evyl menyuge : observatio.—Pr. Pm.
A like development of meaning may be observed in G. warten, to wait, to stay, to attend upon, which is radically identical with It. guardare, to look.
The first of the foregoing quotations from Pr. Pm. explains the Waits or nightly musicians of Christmastide. 'Assint etiam excubiae vigiles [veytes] cornibus suis strepitum et clangorem et sonitum facientes.'—Neccham in Nat. Antiq.

To Waive. See Waif.

Wake. The streak of smooth water left in the track of a ship; Fr. ouaiche. It is remarkable that Fin. wako, Esthon. waggo, signifies a furrow, the most obvious figure from which the wake of a vessel could be named. To plough the sea is a familiar metaphor.

Mine own good Bat, before thou hoise up sail To make a furrow in the foaming seas.—Gascoyne.
Fr. sillon, a furrow; sillage, sillon de mer, the wake of a vessel. Seillonné, furrowed, cloven asunder as the sea by a ship.—Cot. Fin. wannas, ploughshare; wenheen wannas (share of boat), front of keel, cut-water.
The radical idea seems to be the opening of the ground by the ploughshare, from the root vag, vak, which is common to the Finnic and Scandinavian languages.
Magy. vágni, to cut; eret vágni (eret, vein), to open a vein; vágás, a cut; kerek vágás (kerek, wheel), a wheel-rut. ON. vaka, aperio, incido, transfodio; at vaka blóð, to let blood; at vaka ís, to cut a hole in the ice; vök, incisura in glacie facta, vel ejusmodi apertura in aliis; vauk, incisura seu fenestra.—Gudmund. In Norfolk when the 'broads' are mostly frozen over the spaces of open water are called wakes.

* To Wake. ON. vaka, Goth. wakan, AS. wacian, G. wachen, to wake. OHG. wachal, AS. wacol, Lat. vigil, waking.
The original sense is probably to have the eyes open, to look; Swiss Rom. vouaiti, vouaiki, to look.

Wakes. The annual festival of a village, kept originally on the day of dedication of the parish church. The E. churchwake, as far as the festival itself is concerned, corresponds exactly to G. kirchweihe, OHG. kirichwihi, from Goth. weihan, Sw. wiga, to consecrate, but it is not easy to see how the latter word could have passed into wake. It is commonly explained from the vigil or watch that was kept on the evening preceding a saint's day. But wake is sometimes used in the sense of feasting or reveling, and it is probably in this sense that it is to be understood in the case of the parish wakes. In some parts of England it is called the village revel.

Wale. I. Outward timbers in a ship's side, on which men set their feet when they clamber up. Gunwale, a wale which goes about the uttermost strake or seam of the uppermost deck in the ship's waist.—B.
2. Wale or wheal (Fris. wale, walke—Outzen), the raised streak on the skin left by a stripe. AS. walan, vibices.—Som. Wall of a strype, enfleure.—Palsgr.
The radical meaning in both cases seems to be shown in Goth. valus, ON. völr, Sw. wal, a rod, stick; drapwal, slagwal, the part of a flail with which the corn is struck; OFris. walubera, a pilgrim or staff-bearer; Bret. gwalen, Fr.

gaule, a rod, staff, the staff of a flail. For the application to the swelling raised by a stripe, compare ON. vöndr, a wand or rod, also a streak or stripe, a long narrow mark.

To Walk. 1. To go at a foot's pace, to go on foot.
2. To full cloth, to work it in a mill with soap and water, so as to convert it into felt; AS. wealcere, a fuller of cloth. Bret. gwalc'hi, to wash. The radical image seems to be the rolling movement of boiling water. AS. weallan, to boil, bubble up, roll. G. wallen, to boil, wal-lop, bubble up, move in a waving or un-dulatory manner; poetically, to wander, range, ramble, to go, to travel on foot.—Kütn.
Then with a derivative g or k, OHG. walagôn, walgon, fluctuare, volvi, ambu-lare; biwalegôn, volutare.—Graff. G. walge, wasserswalge, rolling water, wave; walgen, walgern, to roll; den teig aus-walgen, to roll dough. Sw. valka något imellan händerna, to roll something be-tween the hands; valka ler, to temper clay, to work it up with water; valka kläde, to full cloth. ON. valka, to roll in the hands, AS. wealcan, to roll, turn, tumble; wealcynde ea, rolling water; wealcere, a fuller. Bav. walken, walchen, to move to and fro, to hover in the air, to full cloth.
The sense of going on foot is a further development of the idea of rolling or wan-dering about. OHG. walgotun, volveban-tur; uualgota, ambulavit (in viâ regum Israel).—Graff.

Wall. AS. weall, wall, a wall; Du. wal, rampart, bank, shore. G. wall, a rampart, town-wall, a bank or dike. Lat. vallum, the palisade or fortification of a camp; vallus, a stake.

Wallet. Walette, a sack or poke.—Pr. Pm. It. valigia (dim. valigietta), a male, cloak bag, budget, seems to be a modification of bolgia, bolgetta, a budget, leather bucket.—Fl. And probably Fr. malle, malette, a little male, a budget or scrip (Cot.), may be another offshoot from the same stock.—See Budget.

Wall-eye. An eye of a whitish colour, from the skin becoming opaque. Cæsius, AS. wealken-eye.—Dief. Sup. Cooper in his Thesaurus, A. D. 1573, renders glauciolus, a horse with a waicle eye.—R. Fris. waeckel, an ulcer.—Kil. ON. vagl i auga, glaucoma, albugo, nubes in oculo.—Gudm. Sw. vagel i ögat, a stye in the eyelid.—Nordforss. Sw. vagel is a perch for fowls; Isl. vagl, a prop or support for a cross beam.

To Wallop. To move to and fro, as the surface of water in a vessel, to boil. Swiss valple, vacillare.—Idioticon Ber-nense. Wallop bears the same relation to wabble that Swiss swalpen does to G. schwappeln, to splash or dash to and fro like water, or OE. walmynge to wame-lynge of the stomach.—Pr. Pm. Pot-wabbler and pot-walloper are both in use for one who boils a pot. Both forms re-present the sound of liquid in agitation, only the place of the labial and liquid is transposed in the two. A similar trans-position of the mute and liquid is seen in sputter and spurt, squitter and squirt; in Da. valtre and vralte, to waddle.
The use of wallop in low language, in the sense of beating one, seems to be taken from comparing the motion of the arm to the action of water dashing to and fro. Norm. vloper, to thresh (rosser).—Héricher.

To Wallow. AS. wealwian, to roll; bewealwian, to wallow, to roll oneself in. Du. wallen, wellen, to boil, bubble, fluctu-ate, also to roll, wallow.—K. Goth. valv-jan, Lat. volvere, to roll. Swiss walen, wallen, to roll; sich umewalen, to roll on the ground. The figure of boiling water is often used to express confused multi-farious movement. Lith. woloti, to roll, Gr. ειλύω, OHG. wellan, to roll; willit, volvit (se in lutosa aqua). OHG. wala-gôn, fluctuare, volvi, ambulare; piuuala-goten, volutatum (in suo sanguine). See Walk.

Wallowish. Nauseating.—B. Wal-low, flat, insipid.—Hal. Du. walghen, to nauseate, loathe; walghinge, nausea, inclination to vomit. Ik walg daran, it turns my stomach. From the sensation of a rolling in the stomach, caused by in-cipient sickness. G. walgen, walgeln, walgern, to roll.—Sanders. In like man-ner the Da. has vamle, to nauseate, loathe, corresponding to G. wammeln, to move about, E. wamble, wabble, to move up and down.

Walnut. Du. walnot, walschenot, AS. walhnot, a foreign nut. Wealh, a foreign-er. Swiss walen, waalen, to speak an unknown language; welsch, wälsch, a foreign language. G. wälsch, Italian; ein Walscher hahn, a Turkeycock; die Wälsche bohne, French beans; walschen, to talk gibberish.

To Wamble. To move or stir, as the bowels do with wind, to rise up as seething water does, to wriggle like an arrow in the air.—B. Wamlyng of the stomake, esmouvement. Palsgr. G. wammeln, wummeln, wammezen, wimmeln, to stir, crawl, swarm. Wamble differs from wabble only in the insertion of the nasal.

Wan.—To Wane. Goth. vans, want-ing; vanana gataujan, to nullify, make void; vanains, diminution. AS. wana, deficiency, wanting. An thing the is wana, one thing is wanting to thee. Anes wana twentig, twenty wanting one, nine-teen. Wanian, gewanian, awanian, to decrease, waste, decay, wane. Thu wa-nodest hine, minuisti eum. Tha wætera wanodon, aquae minuebantur. ON. vanr, wanting; vana, to weaken, diminish, to castrate a horse. The Celtic languages have preserved the word in the least abstract meaning, w. gwan, weak, faint, poor; Bret. gwan, feeble, sickly, vain, empty; Gael. fann, faint, feeble, infirm. Lat. vanus, empty, futile. We have then AS. wan, wanna, E. wan, pale, livid, dusky, properly feeble or weak in colour, what is wanting in bright-ness.

Wan in composition is used as a nega-tive particle; OE. wanhope, Du. wanhope, wantroost, despair; wanweten, to be ignorant or mad; wanmæte, deficient measure, &c. ON. vanæfi, without strength; vankunnandi, unknowing; vanmáttr, vanmegin, want of might, weakness. The W. gwan is used in the same way; gwan-fydd, weak faith, distrust; gwanffydio, to despair; gwangred, a faint belief; gwangredu, to distrust.

Wand. ON. vondr, a shoot of a tree, a rod.

To Wander. There is no essential difference between G. wandern, to wander or go about without settled aim, and wan-deln, to walk, travel, go about one's busi-ness, the terminal elements r and l being used indifferently in the formation of fre-quentative verbs. The primary sense seems to be to fluctuate, roll, move to and fro, as shown in ohg. uuantaûn, volvere, vertere, mutare, mercari.—Schm. Uuantalôt, volutat, ventilat; uuanda-lontero, fluctuantium; giuuantalôn, ver-tere (vestes).—Graff. And wantalôn is only a nasalised form of wadalôn, venti-lare, vagari, whence wadalari, vagabun-dus.—Graff. Thus wander would be re-lated to waddle nearly as wamble to wabble.

To Wane. See Wan.

Want. A derivative from the root wan, signifying deficiency, negation. ON. vanta (impers.), to be wanting, deficient in; vöntun, vöntun, want, deprivation. The verb to want, used in familiar lan-guage to express the desire of the speaker for something, might well be explained as signifying that he feels the want of it. But it is singular that the word is found in W. and Bret. with the positive signifi-cation of desire, and in those languages has no apparent connection with gwan, the Celtic representative of the Teutonic wan. W. chwant, Bret. c'hoant, desire, longing, appetite, lust; chwant bwydd, desire of food, hunger; chwanta, to covet, to lust after.

Wanton. Properly uneducated, ill brought up, then unrestrained, indulging the natural appetites, from the negative particle wan and the participle togen, getogen (OE. towen, itowen), of the AS. verb teon, G. Ziehen, to draw or lead. Ho was itogen among mankunne, And hire wisdome brohte thenne.— she was bred among mankind, and gained her wisdom from thence.—Owl and Nightingale. 'Vor the nome one mahte hurten alle wel itowene earen :' for the name alone might hurt all well-bred ears.—Ancren Riwle, 204. Full-itowen, fully educated.—Ibid. 416. ' Of idele wordes, of untowene thoughts.'—Ibid. 342. Untowe bird, avis indiscipli-nata.—Ibid. 16. Wantowe (wantown, wanton), insolens, dissolutus.—Pr. Pm. ' Seeing evermore his (Gods) ghird to chastisen us in his hand ghif we waxen wantowen or idil.'—Serm. on Miracle Plays, in Nat. Antiq., 2. 44. In like manner we have in G. wolge-zogen, well-bred (Nibel. Lied. 1731); and ungezogen, ill-bred, ill-mannered, rude, saucy.—Kütn.

War. Fr. guerre. It. guerra, war; gara, strife, contention, jarring; Du. werre, contention, strife, war; werren, to disturb, contend, strive, war.—Kil. OHG. werran, to disturb, confuse; gawer, sedi-tio. MHG. werren, to disturb, confuse, trouble, contend. ' Wirret sich ein man mit eime andern, daz si sich slân :' if one man strives with another so that they come to blows. ' Daz sich di wirren mit einander mit worten, mit stôzerie.' G. wirren, to jumble, entangle, embroil, con-found; wirrwarr, embranglement, dis-order, confusion. In like manner Fin. hasa, strepitus conviventium, rixantium, &c. ; hassata, strepo, inquiete me gero, altercor, rixor.

To Warble. To chirp or sing as birds do, to sing in a quavering or trilling way, to purl or gurgle as a brook.—B. The radical image is probably to be found in the bubbling or gurgling of water, and the word is a parallel form with gargle, gurgle, or It. gorgare, gorgolare, to gar-gle, to rattle in the throat, to warble or quaver in singing, also to wharl, or speak in the throat as the Florentines do; sgor-gare, sgorgolare, to gurgle, to warble; sgargagliare, to gargle, rattle in the throat, prattle; borbogliare, to make a confused noise (Fl.); Sp. barbullar, to talk loud and fast; Lang. barbalia, to chatter, tattle; OFr. verbeler, to speak quick and indistinctly.—Roquef. ' I war-bell with the voyce as connyng singers do: Je verbie.'—Palsgr.

The transference from the region of sound to that of movement gives Sc. warble, warple, wrabil, to crawl about, to wriggle, to move to and fro. To war-ble in; to warble or wurble oneself out, to get out of confinement by a continua-tion of twisting motions. To wraple, to entangle.

Ward. The sense of keeping is com-monly expressed by the figure of looking after. Wal. wardé, to guard, keep, ob-serve, defend. It. guardare, Fr. regarder, to look; garder, to keep. Robert of Gloucester, p. 486, says that when K. Richard went to the crusade he 'bitoc the bisshop of Ely this lond in ech ende to wardi:' and shortly after he speaks of ' the bisshop of Ely that this londe adde to loke.' See Guard.

A ward is a person under age, com-mitted to the ward or care of a guardian. The ward of a lock is what guards the lock against opening with a false key. The ward of a town, prison, hospital, is so much as is committed to the care of one alderman or keeper.

A warden, Fr. gardien, is one who has ward or guard of a thing. A warden-pear, Fr. poire de garde, a keeping pear.

Ware.—Aware.—Wary. ON. var, having notice of, aware, also cautious, wary. At verda var vid, to be aware of, to observe. Vara, to warn ; vara sig, varas, to beware, to take heed. Da. vare, guard, care ; tage sig vare, to take heed of; tage vare paa, to watch, have an eye upon. G. gewahr, aware; Du. waeren, waerden, to observe, take care, beware of, keep, guard— Kil. ; waernemen (G. wahr-nehmen), to take notice, perceive ; waer-schouwen, to give notice, to warn. Bav. waren, to look, take care. War waz du tuest: mind what you are about. Fr. fare! look out! take care! beware! OE. WARN gaure, gare, to gaze. The radical mean-ing is doubtless to look, observe, take notice of.

The same root is found in all the Fin-nish languages with no appearance of being borrowed. Lap. liaret, to keep, guard ; wahrok, provident, wary ; wahro-tet, to warn ; Esthon. warrima, to take heed ; Fin. wara, foresight, caution, warning ; warata, to beware, to warn ; waru, cautious, provident, timid. Magy. várni, to expect, watch, wait.

Wares. ON. vara, varnadr, Sw. wara (pl. waror). Da. vare, Du. waere, wares, goods, merchandise. The radical mean-ing seems to be simply provisionment, stores, from the root signifying look, men-tioned in the last article. The develop-ment of the signification is especially clear in Finnish. Warata, to be provident, cautious, to provide, to furnish with what is necessary, in such senses as, to arm my hand with a sword, to fill a purse with money. Warasta, provisions, stores; wara, goods, means, wealth ; wara-huonet (huonet, house), a storehouse, a barn ; takawara (taka, behind, after), stores, provided for the future ; waramakso (makso, payment, expense), a provision for expenses ; wara mies, a supplemental man, a man provided to supply the place of another. Sw. matwaror, eatables, pro-vision of meat, to which we give the name of provisions, κατ' ἐποχήν ; fiskwaror, salted fish, provision of fish. Esthon. warrima, to keep, preserve ; warra, pro-vision, furniture, goods, possessions; warrandus, goods, provision, treasure.

Wargangel. The shrike or butcher-bird, so called from hanging up its prey, on the thorn of a tree, like meat in a butcher's shop. G. wargangel, wurgen-gel (Dief. Sup. in curruca), the shrike, from würgen, to throttle, to butcher, and angel, a thorn.

Warm. ON. varmr, G. warm, OLat. formus, Gr. θερμός, Hind. ghurrum, Pers. germ, hot ; Sanscr. gharma, heat.

To Warn. To give notice, to cause one to take notice, from the root ware, signifying look or take notice. From the same root in a somewhat different appli-cation are Fr. garnir, guarnir, warnir, to provide, prepare, fortify, secure, pre-serve ; garnison, garnesture, provision, furniture, stores (Roquef.) ; from which last is OE. warnestore, to furnish, store, fortify. ' Et que Egypte soit garnie (pre-served) de la famine des sept ans que sont à venir.' The notion of preserving or defending naturally passes into that of warding or keeping off, thrusting away, forbidding, refusing. Thus Fr. defendre acquires the sense of forbidding, and to warn one off is to forbid his entrance. I warne, I defende one or commande him not to do a thynge.—Palsgr. AS. wyrnan, to warn, refuse, forbid, deny, hinder. ON. varna, to forbid, refuse.
And swa the land embandowned he That nane durst warne (refuse) to do his will. Bruce, iv. 392.
The G. uses the simpler form without the derivative n; wehren, to bar, hinder, prohibit, forbid. Einem den zugang wehren, to forbid one entrance, to warn him off.
Warp. ON. varp, Du. werp, werp-draed, werpgaeren, werfte, G. werft, the long threads laid out parallel to each other between which the woof is shot in weaving. Du. werp, worp, a cast.
To Warp. 1. Goth, wairpan, AS. weorpan, ON. verpa, G. werfen, to cast; then in a special sense, to take a certain turn, to bend. A cast in the eye is when one eye is turned out of the true direc-tion. Das holz wirft sich: the wood casts or warps.—Küttn. ON. werpask, N. varpa seg, Da. kaste sig, to contract, to warp.
2. To warp a ship, to hale her to a place by means of a rope laid out for that purpose and fastened to an anchor. —B. Da. varpe, to warp a ship; varp-toug, a tow-line or warp.
The word probably comes in the first instance from the language of fishermen. ON. varpa in a special sense is to cast or lay out a net, whence varpa. Da. varpe-garn, a drag-net. N. varp, a cast with a net, a laying out of the net; varpa, to fish with a net, and thence, apparently from comparison with the hauling in of a drag-net, to warp a ship.
Warrant. — Warren. It has been shown under Ware and Ward, as before under Guard, that the figure of looking out, looking after, was used to express the sense of taking care of, guarding, pre-serving against, making safe. OHG. gewar, safe, secure (as Lat. tutus, from tueor, to look). Giuuara vesti, munitum præsi-dium. Daz siben ziug gewaerrer sint dann zwen: that seven witnesses are safer, more reliable, than two. Giwar, security, safety, safe refuge. Jederman flohe an sein gewar da er denn meinte sicher zu seyn: every one fled to his re-fuge where he considered himself safe.—Schmeller. Hence OFr. garir, to seek safety, to take refuge.
Mais ne saveit queu part aler, N'osout des grantz foresz eisseir, Kar il ne saveit ou garir. Benoit, Chron. des Ducs de Norm. 2. 399.
—he dare not quit the great forests, for he did not know where to find shelter. OHG. gewarheit, tutela; also security, pledge, secure residence. — Schm. G. gewähr, assurance, security, surety. Dem käufer die gewähr leisten, to give security or safe possession to the purchaser. Ge-währsmann, Pl.D. waarsman, warend, warent, one who warrants or gives secur-ity, who answers for the safe possession of a property. Waren, wär machen, to assure, make good, certify, prove by oath, witnesses, &c. OE. warant, protector, defensor.—Pr. Pm. So in OFr. garieur, garent, guarent, one who makes safe, certifies, answers for; gariment, garison, surety, guarantee.
Another derivative from the same source is OFr. garene, warene, a place where animals are kept, a henyard, pigeon-house, fishpond, rabbit warren. — Roquef. A preserve for game expresses the same idea in modern language.
The derivation of warrant and warren, from the root ware, signifying caution, and thence defence, security, safety, may be further illustrated by the formation of words having the same meaning from Lat. cavere, cautum, to beware, to guard against. Thus in Mid.Lat. we find cau-tus, safe, undisturbed; cautis, cautum, a security or written engagement for the performance of a condition; cautare, in-cautare, to protect, secure, warrant.
'Et omnia pecora vestra per omne reg-num meum sint secura et cauta tanquam mea propria, et libera et ubique habeant pascua.'—Charta Alphons. Reg. Castellae A.D. 1213. 'Cauto vero [I guarantee] supradictos homines et omnia quae ha-bent vel habebunt, quod nullus de cetero pro aliqua voce vel calumniis, excepto pro pretio debito audeat pignorare, vel de suo aliquid prendere, molestare vel calumniare. Hujus autem liberationis et incautationis inchartationem facio Deo et Stae Agathas.'—Charta Ferrandi Reg. Cast. A.D. 1224. From the foregoing application of cautus, in the sense of pro-tected, secure from intrusion, is Sp. coto, an inclosure of pasture grounds, a land-mark, and Port, couto, an inclosure, park, warren, rabbit-burrow, form of a hare, asylum, refuge.

Wart. Du. werte, wratte—Kil., G. warze. Was.—Were. Goth. visan, prt. vas, vesun, to remain, continue, stay, to be; fauravisan, to be to the fore; vists, nature. ON. vera (anciently vesa, visa—Jonsson), prt. var, vas, várum, Sw. vara, AS. wesan, to remain, continue, be. Sanscr. vas, to dwell, to live, to wear clothes.

It is well known that the verb to be is an abstraction unknown to the language of gesture and the rudest uncivilised languages. ' In American and Polynesian languages,' says Farrar, Chapters on Lang. 54, ' there are forms for I am well, I am here, &c., but not for I am. More than this, savage nations [when they learn English] cannot even adopt the verb to be. A negro says, " Your hat no lib that place you put him in." ' I have known a child, when learning to speak, say, Where it live? where is it ? Sw. blifwa, to abide, remain, continue, is the common word for to become, to be. We must therefore regard the sense of continuance expressed by the verb visan, vera, &c., as prior to that of abstract being, and we cannot separate the verb of which was and Were are members from G. wahren, to last, and E. wear. See Wear. The primary signification is probably to look, to see, from whence all the others naturally flow. To look, to guard, preserve, defend, cover, or to guard, to keep, to endure, to remain, to be. The G. warten, to expect or wait, is identical with It. guardare, to look, and it has been shown that the primary sense of E. wait is to look out, while we have argued in favour of a similar origin for bide, abide.

To Wash. AS. waescan, wacsan, G. waschen, Sw. waska. A parallel form with swash, slosh, representing the sound of dashing water. 'A great swash of water, magnus aquarum torrens.'—Coles in Hal. Swash, refuse, hogwash, soft, quashy. — Hal. ' Drenched with the swassing waves.' — Taylor. Piedm. svassé, to splash, rinse, wash. Svassé un caval, to bathe a horse ; svassese la boca, to rinse or wash out one's mouth. Bav. schwatteln, to splash ; schwetti, a horsewash. In G. schwatzen, waschen, to tattle, the expression is transferred from the sound of dashing water to that of clacking tongues. N. vada, vadda, vassa, to dabble, splash, wade, also to chatter, tattle.

Wasp. AS. wæsp, waps, ohg. wafsa, wefsa, Lat. vespis, wasp. Lith. wapsá, a gadfly. There can be little doubt that it comes from a word signifying to sting. So Gael. speach, bite, strike smartly, and speach (Gr. σφήξ), a wasp or any venom-ous little creature, or its sting or bite. Lap. pusiet, to sting as a serpent. Fin. puskia, to strike with the horns; puski-ainen, a wasp.

Wassail. A custom still used in some places on Twelfth night of going about with a great bowl of ale, drinking of healths.—B. Hence wassailers, revellers. From the AS. salutation on pledging one to drink, was hæl, be of health, which the person accepting the pledge answered in the terms drinc hæl, I drink your health. E pur une feyze esternuer Tantot quident mal trouer, Si uesheil ne diez aprez :—and for a single sneeze they expect to be taken ill unless you say uesheil, God bless you.—Manuel des Pecchés, 1100.

Waste. The proper meaning of the word is the same as that of the equivalent Pol. pusty, empty, void, unoccupied, desert. Thus the waste water of a mill is what runs away without contributing to drive the wheel; to waste your money is to spend it in vain, without obtaining an adequate return. In waste was formerly used in the sense of in vain. ' Take my councell yet or ye go, for fear ye walk in waste.'—Gammer Gurton, II. 4. It. guastare and Fr. gaster, gâter, signify to spoil or render unfit for occupation or employment. Mid.Lat. gastum, bar-ren land, fallow. OHG. wôsti, wuosti, de-sert, solitary ; wuostinna, Du. woestijne, AS. westen, Mid.Lat. vastina, Fr. gastine, a desert, uncultivated land. G. wüst, waste, desert, uninhabited; das wüste gerinne, the waste water in a mill. The term is then applied to the absence of cultivation in a moral sense. Ein wüster mensch, a rude, rough, brutal, ill-bred man. In the same way Lat. vastus, waste, desert, desolate ; also awkward, unmannerly, ill bred, uncouthly large, vast.

Watch. See Wait.

Water.—Wet. Goth. vato, pl. vatna, ON. vatn, Lith. wandù. Let. uhdens, OHG. wazar, G. wasser, Gr. ὕδωρ, ὕδατος, water; ON. vátr, Sw. wat, Da. vaad, Lat. udus, wet. It is difficult to suppose that these forms are not from the same root with wade, to splash through water. This whit waseled in the fen almost to the ancles. P. P. (Skeat), 1. 432.

Wattle. From OHG. wadalôn, MHG. wadelen, wedelen, to waver, move to and fro (see Waddle), G. wadel, wedel are used to signify whatever wavers, dangles, or moves to and fro, as a fan, the tail of an animal, a plume of feathers, the waving branches of a tree, on the same principle, in the latter instance, that the name of waivers is given in the E. of England to small waving twigs. Hal. Bav. wadel, fir-branches, twigs, branchwood; wadeln, to cut brushwood.—Schm. 'Da rauscht in den tannewedeln: it sounds in the fir-branches.'—Deutsch. Mundart. 2. 167. Swiss wedele, a bundle of twigs. Hence must be explained E. wattle, provincially a hurdle (Hal.), a frame of interwoven twigs or rods; to wattle, to interweave with rods.

From the same sense of waving to and fro are the wattles or waddles of a cock, the loose pieces of flesh which dangle beneath his chin. So Du. quabbe, a dew-lap, from G. quabbeln, wabbeln, to shake like jelly, mhg. wadel, an apron, what hangs before for concealment. Machten in wadel von veigenbaum: made them aprons of fig-leaves.

Wave. In OE. written wawe; Goth. vegs (pl. vagos), AS. wag, G. woge. Da. vove, N. vaag, Fr. vague, billow, wave. Sw. wâg is both a balance and a wave, the name being given to both for the same reason, viz. from the up and down movement of each. OHG. wegan, to move, vibrate, nod, weigh; wagôn, moveri; wâg, gurges, vorago, lacus, æquor. In manigero wazzero wage: in diluvio aquarum multarum.—Notker. The radical forms waggle and wabble are closely connected, and their derivatives frequently intermingle.

To Waver.—Wave. Sc. waff, waif, wawe, to fluctuate; to wavel, to move backwards and forwards; to waver, wawer, to fluctuate, wander. And in that myrk nycht wawerand will. Wyntown.

ON. váfa, vofa, to wave to and fro; váfa yfir (as G. schweben), to hang over; váfra, to totter, to roam or wander about. G. quabbeln, wabbeln, to shake like jelly; G. dial. wabben, wabbeln, wabern, waffeln, wafflen, to waver, totter, move to and fro.—Deutsch. Mundart. 2. Bav. waibeln, waiben, to waver, totter, flutter, twirl. Waiben wie ein rohr, to shake like a reed; waiben wie ein topf, to whirl like a top. Du. wapperen, to waver, vacillate, swing. E. quaver, to shake with the voice, to tremble; to quave, to move to and fro; an earthquake, a quagmire. Fin. wapista, to quaver, sound tremulous, to shake or tremble; wapina, a tremulous sound, a trembling. See Wabble.

Wax. AS. weax, ON. vax, G. wachs, Pol. vosk, Russ. voska, Esthon. wahha, Magy. viasz, wax. Fin. waha, a rock; then by a strong metaphor, waha weden, the rock of water, foam; waha meden, the rock of honey, wax; wahainen, rocky, foamy, waxen or waxy. Fin. waaksi, wahto, or waahti also signify foam.

To Wax. AS. weaxan, Goth. wahsjan, ON. vaxa, Sanscr. vah, Gael. fas, to grow, increase.

Way. Goth. vigs, ON. vegr, Sanscr. vaha, Lat. via, Fr. voie.

To Wayment. To lament. The interjection of suffering is in Lettish wai! (corresponding to G. wehe! i. e. woe!), and with the personal pronoun, waiman! equivalent to Gr. οἴμοι! woe is me! From the compound interjection are formed waimanaht! to cry waiman! (as Gr. οἰμώζειν, to cry οἴμοι!), to lament; waimanas, lamentation; which seem to explain the formation of E. wayment.

Wayward. Perhaps a corruption of wrayward, as G. wasen compared with Du. wrase, a sod. Crabbyd, awke or wrawe (wraywarde—W.), bilosus, cancerinus; wraw, froward, ungoodly, perversus, bilosus, protervus.—Pr. Pm.

Weak. What yields to pressure. AS. wâc, weak, pliant; Da. veg, pliant; svag, weak; Sw. svig, supple, agile; G. weich, Du. weeck, weyck, Sw. wek, soft, yielding to the touch, tender, effeminate; G. schwach, weak. Bret. gwak, soft, tender, delicate. G. weichen, AS. wican. Da. vige, Sw. wika, swiga, to yield, give place to.

The radical image is seen in ON. vik, a slight movement, a nick or recess, whence vikja, to set in motion, to turn; also to give place; vikna, to give place, to yield, to be moved or softened. The AS. swican has the same radical meaning, the sense of deceiving being derived from that of a short quick turn or movement. Compare Sw. wika af, to turn aside, to quit, wika undan, to go off, escape, quit, with AS. him fram swican, went from him; thone death beswican, to escape death.

Weal.—Wealth. AS. wel, well; wela, abundance, wealth, prosperity; in pl. riches; wela, welig, rich. OHG. welzda, welitha, wealth. In the same way we have Fr. bien, well, and as a substantive, biens, goods, substance, wealth.

Weald. AS. weald, G. wald, wood, forest. The weald of Kent is the broad woody valley between the bare chalky downs which occupy so large a portion of the county. To Wean. G. gewöhnen, to accustom; entwöhnen, to break the custom, to use one to do without, to wean. Da. vanne, to accustom; afvanne, vænne fra, to wean. Du. wennen, to accustom, to wean. See Won.
Weapon. Goth. vepna, arms; OHG. wâfan, G. waffe, ON. vapn, AS. wæpn, weapon; Du. wapen, arms, tools.—Kil.
To Wear. 1. To last, endure or hold out, as, this cloth wears well, i. e. lasts long.—B. ON. vera, G. währen, and Sw. wara are used in the same sense. Me-dan det warar: while this lasts. Tyg som warar länge: stuff that lasts long, that wears well. Den klädningen har warat twå somrar: that coat has lasted, has worn two summers. OHG. weren, manere, subsistere, durare; durah weren, permanere; werig, wirig, perpetuus, permanens; unwerig, caducus.—Graff. To wear out is to endure to the end of its existence, to come to an end, corresponding to G. verwesen, to moulder away, to decay. To wear off, to go off by lasting, to go gradually off. When we look to the verb to last we see that the idea of continuance or endurance springs from the sense of performing or fulfilling its proper end. To last is the equivalent of G. leisten, to comply with one's duty, to perform what one is required, to fulfil.—Kühtn. 'Thei ben false and traiterous and lasten nogt that thei bihoten.'—Sir Jno. Mandeville. The same sequence is shown in E. wear, to endure, compared with OHG. weren, gawerin, gawerên, facere, præstare, servare, to keep, fulfil, perform. Uuereton iro gedingung, servaverunt pactum; uueret sermones dei, he observes the commandments of God; legem uueren, to keep the law.—Graff. The word keep itself is used in both senses, to observe or fulfil, and also to last. To keep quiet is to remain quiet, and the word is provincially used for reside or dwell. A Cambridge student would ask, Where do you keep? But words signifying keep, guard, take care of, almost always derive their significance from the figure of looking, as Lat. servare signifies in the first instance to look, then to keep or guard, while the derivative observe signifies to perform or fulfil. The sense of a sharp look out is predominant in E. ware, beware, while G. bewahren signifies to keep or fulfil. 'Das gerechte volk, das den Glauben bewahret:' the righteous people which keepeth the faith.—Isaiah 26. 2. Die Gebothe Gottes bewahren: to keep or fulfil the commandments of God. Thus we finally trace the pedigree of wear to the root war, which through a wide range of language signifies look or take notice, as shown under Ware, Ward, Warn, &c. The G. wahr (Lat. verus, W. gwir), true, is probably to be explained as what keeps or fulfils the purpose for which it was designed. The true way is that which leads to the end we are desirous of attaining. A true man is one who fulfils his professions. A true saying is one which comes out in accordance with fact, when put to the proof. Thus verity may be regarded as the capacity of a thing for wear. OHG. uuar, veritas, fides; ze uuare, certè; gawâri, probitas; ungawâr, improbus; war it, kewarit, piuuarit, probat.—Graff.
2. To wear clothes. The expression of a garment wearing well, or being worn out, seems so closely connected with that of wearing clothes, that we are at first inclined to identify the verb in the two cases and to explain the sense of wearing clothes as remaining or being in them, in accordance with ON. at vera í skyrtu, í brókum: to be in a shirt, in breeches, to wear them; or as we say, he was in his shirt sleeves, in his best clothes. Sanscr. vas, to dwell, to wear clothes. But further examination tends to show that although the ultimate origin is probably the same in wear, to last, and wear, to bear clothes, yet the two senses are not immediately connected. The line of thought seems to be, to look out, take heed, beware, guard against, protect, cover, clothe. Sich vor der Kälte, der Hitze bewahren, to guard against cold or heat; verwahren, to preserve. ON. verja, AS. werjan, to defend, protect, cover. Hrægle hine mid to werianne: clothing to cover himself withal. OHG. warjan, werjan, defendere, prohibere, tegere, vestire.—Graff. Mit uuati er thih io uuerie Joh emmizigen nerie: Amictu ipse te defendet, et perpetuo alet. Otfr. II. 22. 47. Then elliptically, to wear clothes, to cover (oneself with) clothes. AS. he moste wæpen werian, he must wear weapons, must guard (himself with) weapons. OHG. gauueridont Christan, induerunt Christum; peinuueri, periscelides, leg-clothing.
3. To wear ship, to turn the ship before the wind; properly to veer ship: Fr, virer vent arrière. It. virare in poppa.—Roding. Wear.—Weir.
From G. wehren, Du. weren, to ward off, prevent, forbid, defend (see Wear, 2.), are G. wehr, Du. weer, sepimentum, defensio, munitio, agger; G. wehr, a dam, dyke, causey. Den strom durch ein wehr aufhalten: to stop the current by a dyke or wear. Wehrdam, a wear or weir on a river. Mühl-wehr, a mill-dam; seewehr, a mole or pier; fisch-wehr, a fish-pond; Pl.D. ware, a dam across a stream to set nets in for catch-ing eels, &c.; a crib to defend the banks of a river or a sea-dyke. AS. war, wer, sepimentum, retinaculum; a dam for fish, fish-pond. Wayre, where water is holde, gort.—Palsgr.
In the sense of a fish-pond the word may be confounded with OE. wayowre, stondinge water, piscina (Pr. Pm.); Suf-folk waver, Du. wouwer, vyver, G. wei-her, OHG. wiwari, MHG. wiiuer, wier, a pond for fish, from Lat. vivarium.
Weary. AS. werig, weary; G. währen, to endure; langwierig, lingering, tedious; Da. vare, to endure; langvarig, pro-tracted, lingering. The extremity of weari-ness is when we are quite worn out with labour.
Weasand. AS. wæsend; OFris. was-ende, the windpipe; Bav. waisel, wazel, wäsling, Suffolk wezzen, the gullet, throat. Probably from ON. hvæsa, Da. hvæse, to wheeze, to make a sound in breathing; E. dial. quezzen, to choke. The same relation holds good between ON. querk, the throat, and E. wherk, to breathe with difficulty, to make a noise in breathing; wherken. Da. kværke, to choke.
Weasel. G. wiesel.
Weather. Du. weder, G. wetter, ON. vedr, weather, wind, storm. Pol. wiatr, wind; wiać, G. wehen, to blow. Bohem. wjtr, gen. wjtru, wind; wati, wjti, to blow.
To Weave.—Web. Sanscr. vap, weave; ON. vefa. Da. væve, Du. weven, G. weben, to weave; Gewebe, Du. webbe, ON. vefr, what is woven, a web. G. weben is also to move to and fro, to stir. Leben und weben, to have life and motion. Bav. wabern, to be in movement, to wander to and fro; wabern, wabeln, to bustle about; waiben, waibeln, to stagger, totter. The radical image is the reciprocating motion of the shuttle in weaving. See Wave, Waver, Wabble.
Wed. Goth. vadi, OHG. wetti, AS. wedd, a pledge, what binds us to perform a certain condition, from Goth. vidan or vithan, to bind, gavidan, to bind together, to join; OHG. wetan, gewetan, zisamana-giwetan, to bind together. Goth. gaviss, a fastening or joint; disviss, a loosing.
To Wed. Properly to engage or pledge oneself, to betroth; then passing on to signify the marriage which is the conclu-sion of the engagement. Goth. vadi, a wed or pledge; gavadjon, AS. weddian, to engage, to promise. Him weddedon feoh to syllenne: they engaged to give him money. Gif hwa ordales weddige: if any one undertakes an ordeal. Weddige se bridguma: let the bridegroom promise. Then in the special sense of marriage engagement. Weddian heora magan to wife: to betroth their relation, to promise her in marriage. Weddian was after-wards, as in E., used for marriage, but the proper term for the latter was æwnian, and the two are contrasted together in Sax. Chron., p. 314. 37.—Cockayne, in Gloss. to St Marherite. Flem. wedden, spondere, polliceri, fidejubere.—Kil.
In like manner from Lat. spondere, to engage, are formed sponsus, sponsa, an engaged person, a bridegroom or bride, and thence Fr. époux, épouse, a husband or wife. The comparison of the corre-sponding forms in Welsh would lead to a different view of the immediate origin of the expression, although we are ultimate-ly brought to the same point in both cases. W. gwedd is a yoke or pair, a team of horses; gweddawg, yoked, cou-pled, wedded; newydd weddawg, newly married; dyweddio, to yoke or couple together, to join in marriage, to espouse; dyweddi, espousal, betrothal. The point of connection between the two lines of thought is that W. gwedd as well as Goth. vadi, a wed or pledge, seems to be de-rived from the root shown in Goth. vidan, gavidan, to bind together. OHG. kiwe-tan, conjunctus; zesamanagiwatan, sociarunt; kiwet, a yoke or pair of oxen; MHG. gewete, companion; Swiss, Bav. an-, ein-wetten, to yoke together. Goth. Thatei nu Guth gavath: what God hath joined together—let not man put asunder.—Mark 10. 9.
By a curious coincidence we have also Esthon. weddama, to lead; Lith. wedu, westi, to lead, to lead a bride home, to marry, to be compared with Lat. ducere ux-orem. Wedes, wedded, married; wedlys, the bridegroom; wesele, a wedding; Let. weddama meita, a marriageable daughter.
Wedge. Du. wegghe, wigghe, G. weck, a wedge, oblong mass.

Wednesday. AS. wodensdæg, Wo-den's day.
Weed. Du. wieden, to cleanse, especially of noxious herbs, to weed. Thence wiede, a weed, the noxious herbs that are pulled up and cast out from among the cultivated crops. Fr. vuider, to void, purge, cleanse. See Void.
Weeds. AS. wæd, clothing, garment. Wist and wæda, food and garments. OHG. wât, gawâti, clothing, garment; karuwât, mourning; linwât, linen clothes; G. wand, gewand, cloth, woven materials; leinwand, linen. Fin. waatet, cloth, clothes, garment.
Week. AS. weoce, ON. vika, G. woche.
To Ween. Goth. vens, expectation, hope; venjan, to expect; gavenjan, to suppose, to think; ON. ván, von, væni, expectation, hope; vána, vána, to hope. Du. waen, opinion; waenen, to think, to ween.—Kil. G. wähnen, to imagine, suppose, think. Sc. will of wane, at a loss for counsel.
To Weep. Goth. vopjan, to call, to cry; OHG. wuofan, MHG. wuofen, wafen, to make an outcry, to lament, weep; wuof, wuoft, AS. wop, hveop, outcry, lamentation. ON. óp, outcry. From AS. wop is formed wepan, properly to lament, to wail, then to weep or shed tears, as from ON. óp comes æpa, to shout, to cry.
The syllable whoop is used to represent a shrill sound in whooping cough, and as a verb signifies to shout. War whoop, ON. heróp, the battle-cry, shout of attack.
Lith. vapiti, Russ. vopit', to make an outcry, to weep; vopl', lamentation, cry.
In Gr. óp, ópóç, the sense of shouting is softened down to the signification of the ordinary voice or a separate utterance, a word; and by a similar change in the radical vowel to that shown in ON. óp, æpa, E. whoop, weep, we have ἔπω (preserved in the aorist εἶπον), to say; ἔπος, a word. The same train of thought is seen in Lat. vox, vocis (equivalent to Gr. óp, ἔπος), the voice, from voco, to call, where the guttural c takes the place of the p in the other languages. Sanscr. vach, speak.
Weevil. The worm that breeds in corn. AS. wibba, a worm; wibil, wifel, G. wiebel, Du. wevel, a weevil; Lith. wabalas, a beetle.
The name is taken from the multifarious movement of a swarm of small animals. G. weben, to stir about, to swarm with; webeln, to wag, stir, bustle.—Kütn. Bav. wibeln, wubeln, wibbeln, wimmeln, to move about, to swarm; wibelig, stirring, sprawling, crawling.

'Alles wibbelt, kribbelt, sich beweget.' 'Das wibende, wabende wasser.'—Sanders. Pl.D. wibelsteerten, to wag the tail.
The Latin name of the insect, curculio, seems to have been formed on exactly the same principle. It may be explained from It. gorgogliare, to gurgle, to boil, and then (from a comparison of the perpetual movement of swarming insects to the agitation of boiling water), 'to breed or become vermine, wormlets, or such creepers or weevils as breed in pulse or corn.'—Fl. See Wabble. Russ. wriyati, to boil, also to swarm, to crawl. Grisons buglir, to boil, to swarm.
To Weigh.—Weight. The act of weighing takes its name from the wagging movement of the beam, one scale going up as the other goes down. Bav. wagan, wagen, to rock, shake, move; wagen, a cradle; wâg, a balance; gewâg, a lever; wegen, to prise a thing up; G. wiegen, to rock, to move to and fro; also (as wagen) to weigh; bewegen, to move; wâge, a balance. Du. waggelen, waegelen, to waggle, vacillate; waegen, to sway up and down, to vacillate; to move; waege, a balance.—Kil. ON. vagga, to rock; vega, to lift; vág, a balance; vagi, weight; vágr, heavy.
AS. wegan, to lift, to weigh. In the expression of weighing anchor the word is still used in the sense of lifting up. Boh. waha, a balance, the swipe of a well. Russ. waga, a balance; wajit', to have weight, to weigh.
The same connection between the terms for weighing and for wagging up and down is seen in Let. swêrt (wippen, wagen), to seesaw, to weigh; swirris, swipe of a well; swars, weight; swarra tilts, a drawbridge; swarrigs, weighty, heavy. Lith. swirti, swyroti, to waver, sway, swing; swerti, to weigh; swarus (showing the origin of G. schwer), heavy; swartis, scales, balance; swirtis, scale, beam of balance, swipe of well. Du. swieren, vibrare, vagari, gyrare.
Weird. AS. wyrd, gewyrd, fate, fortune, destiny, from Goth. vairthan, AS. weorthan, G. werden, to come to pass, to become, to be.
To weird was then elliptically used in the sense of destine, appoint as one's fate, or announce as one's fate, predict.
And what the doom sae dire, that thou Dost weird to mine or me? Jam. Pop. Ballads.
Altho' his mither in her weirds Foretald his death at Troy—

Hence Shakespeare in Macbeth calls the witches the weird-sisters, and latterly weird has come to be used in our literature in the sense of something belonging to the world of witches, supernatural, unearthly. In the same way the analogous conception expressed by Fr. féerie, magic, and E. fairy, takes that designation from Lat. fatum.
To Weld. Sw. wälla, G. wellen, to join two pieces of iron at a heat just short of melting. From G. wallen, Du. wellen, AS. weallan, to boil; weallende fyr, fervens ignis. In Scotland coals are said to wall when they cake together in burning. The process of welding iron is named, in many languages, from the word for boiling. Illyrian variti, to boil, to weld iron; Let. wārīt, to boil; sawārīt, to weld; Magy. forrni, to boil; forrasztani, to solder, to weld; Turk. kaynamak, to boil, to weld; Grisons buglir, to boil, to solder metals.
To Welk.—Welewe. G. welken, Du. welcken, verwelcken, to fade, wither, decay, dry. Properly to lose colour.
For which full pale and welkid is my face.
Pardoner's T.
The which was whilome grene gras, Is welewid hay, as time now is.
Gower in Hal. w. gwelw, pale. AS. fealo, fealwe, fallow, yellow; fealwian, to grow yellow; wealwian, to dry up. Esthon. walg, white; walkia, whitish. Fin. walkia, white; walawa, whitish; walastaa, to become pale or whitish; halewa, pale; halistua, to become whitish, to fade.
Welkin. AS. wolcen, G. wolke, cloud; wolken himmel, the clouds of heaven, the welkin, sky.
Perhaps wolke may be from the woolly (G. wolle, wool) aspect of the clouds, analogous to Fin. liemen, wool, lieminka, down, wool, and thence a thin cloud; liemettää, to cover with wool, to become clouded over. The fleecy clouds is an habitual metaphor, which we also find in Virgil.
Tenuia nec lana per caelum vellera ferri.
Well. Goth. vaila, well, better; OHG. wala, wola, welo, G. wohl, well. w. gwell, better. Lap. waljo, good; waljo ālma, a thorough good man; waljet, ON. velja, to take what is good, to choose.
To Well.—Well. AS. weallan, ON. vella, Du. wellen, G. wallen, to boil, bubble up, spring. AS. wylle, ODu. welle, walle, a spring, a well, spring water. G. quellen, to spring; quelle, a spring of water.

Welt. w. gwald, a hem; gwald esgid, the welt of a shoe. ' The welt of a garment, bord, bordure d'un vestement.' —Cot. Gael. balt, baltan, border, belt, welt of a shoe.
To Welter. AS. wæltan, Pl.D. wältem, weltern, woltern, Sw. walta, wältra, G. wälzen, to roll, wallow, welter; sich in seinem blute wälzen, to wallow or welter in one's blood. Fr. vautrer, to wallow like a sow in the mire. Lat. volutare, to roll. See Wallow.
Wem. AS. wæm, wom, a spot, stain, blemish, crime, sin, evil. ON. vomm, shame, dishonour, vice. Fin. wamma, a fault, blemish, wound, swelling, boil; wammata, to hurt, to wound.
Wen. AS. wenn, a swelling, a wart. Perhaps a corruption of wem.
Wench. A depreciatory or familiar term for a young woman. The parallel form in Germany is mensch, minsch, minsk, answering to Goth. mannisk, OHG. mennisc, a derivative from mann. Swab. mensch, a girl, a mistress, a woman of the lower orders; vermenschern, to wench. Westerw. mensch, a prostitute; Pl.D. minsk, contemptuously, a woman; sich beminsken, to take a wife. The interchange of w and m is doubtless unusual, but wir in some parts of Germany becomes mer, mir.
On the other hand wennik is used in G. as a depreciatory term for a woman; schäl-wennik, a slattern, untidy wench. Wennik, wennk, a woman's garment.—Brem. Wtb.
To Wend.—Went. To go. AS. wendan, to turn, turn his steps, go. Of Ledene on Englisc wende: turns from Latin into English. Wende hine thanon: turned him thence. Wendan hider and thider: to go to and fro. In the same way, to return is to go back, and in OE. to bow, i. e. to bend, meaning to bend his steps, was much used in the sense of go. See Bow. ON. venda, G. wenden, to turn. Venda vegi sínum: to turn his course. Bav. winden, to turn, to go in a certain direction. ' Thie liuti wuntun heim : ' the people went home.—Otfr.
Were.—Weregild. In the Old German laws the death of a man was generally compounded for by the payment of a sum of money to the relations of the murdered man. This was called his were or weregild, ohg. werigelt, OFris. wergeld, werield, AS. wera, wer, weregeld. Gildan were, to pay were. To eacan tham riht were: in addition to his right weregild. OSax. were, weregheld, luttio, pretium redemptionis.—Kil. The word is commonly explained from AS. wer, Lat. vir, man, in accordance with ON. manngjöld, mannbot, Da. mandebod, composition or fine paid for the death of a man. And doubtless the term was early understood in this sense: 'weergelt, dat is manne-gelt.'—Richthofen. It is remarkable however that in all the Finnic languages were signifies blood, which would give a much more lively expression of the idea. Lap. warr, Esthon. werre, Fin. weri, Magy. vér, blood; vérdij, Esthon. werre-hind (hind=price, cost, value), G. blutgelt, the price of blood, money paid in satisfaction of blood. Turk. kan, blood; kan-pahassi, money paid to the heir of a slain man by the homicide.

Schmeller's explanation is less probable, from weren, geweren, to pay or discharge an obligation. Abraham says to Isaac, 'Du must das opfer seyn, wir müssen den Herren geweren.' Werung, w.rschaft, payment, satisfaction.

Werewolf. The temporary transformation of men into wolves was a very general superstition, giving rise to Gr. λυκάνθρωπος, wolfman. The corresponding term in AS. was werwolf, from wer, Goth. wair, Lat. vir, man. Hence Mid. Lat. gerulphus, OFr. garwal, garol, garou. 'Vidimus enim frequenter in Angliâ per lunationes homines in lupos mutari; quod hominum genus Gerulphos Galli nominant, Angli vero Werewulf dicunt. Were enim Anglicè virum sonat; wulf, lupum.'—Gervas. Tileber. in Duc.

Bisclaveret ad nun en Bretan, Garwall l'apelent li Norman.

The intrinsic meaning of the word being now obscured to a French ear, the term for wolf was again prefixed in an intelligible form: loup-garou, a werewolf.

West. It is remarkable that both East and West admit of explanation from the Finnish languages. Esthon. wessi, water; wessi kaar (the wet quarter), the West; wessi tuul (the wet wind), the N. W. wind.

Wet. See Water.

Whale. AS. hwal, G. wallfisch. Gr. φάλαινα, φάλαινα, Lat. balæna.

Whang. A blow or bang, to beat, to throw or bang down with violence.—Mrs. Baker. From the notion of flinging violently down comes the sense of something large, a large separate piece, a whacking piece, a thumper. Whang, anything large, a thong—Hal.; whang, quhayng, a thick slice, a whang of cheese.—Jam. A quhank, a great slice of cheese.—Gl.

WHELK. Grose. A strap is a slice or separate portion of leather.

It is probable that AS. thwang has the same origin, as we find thwack answering to whack, as thwang to whang. So also we have the synonyms whart and thwart, whittle and thwittle.

Wharf. The G. werfen, to cast (auf-werfen, to cast up), is doubtless the origin of Pl.D. warf, a mound of earth on which houses are placed for protection against inundation, or a raised place by the waterside where ships are built and repaired; also a wharf or shore secured with timber.—Brem. Wtb. Du. werf, a raised place on which a house is built; scheepswerf, timmerwerf; Sw. skepphvarf, a dockyard, shipyard.—Bomhoff. Holstein warf, worf, warve, werft, a raised mound on which a house stands.—Schütze. E.Fris. warf, werf, raised ground on which a house, church, or windmill is placed.—Wiarda.

Wheal. See Wale.

Wheat. AS. hwæte, Goth. hwaitei. The name is conjectured to be derived from Goth. hveits, white.

Wheatear. A bird with a white rump, formerly called whitetail, from whence wheatear appears to be corrupted. Fr. blanculet, a whitetail, or bird of her bigness that is very fat and good eating.—Cot.

To Wheedle. To persuade by coaxing or flattery. From G. wedeln, to wag the tail. In Fab. et Contes, III. 58, the dog says Je vois après et si couëte Por avoir aucune chosette.

Couëter, to wag the tail.

Da. logre, to wag the tail, to flatter, wheedle; ON. fladra, to wag the tail, blanditiis fallere, to wheedle.

Wheel. AS. hweol, ON. hjól, hvel, anything circular, a wheel, W. chwyl, a turn, a course; chwylfa, an orbit. Du. wiel, a wheel, a whirlpool, the whorl of a spindle; wielbrood, a twist, bread twisted in a spiral form. Lanc. wheel, wheelpit, a whirlpool.

To Wheeze. AS. hweosan, to breathe with difficulty, to breathe audibly. ON. hvæsa. Da. hvæse, to wheeze, to hiss. Yorksh. whazzle, to wheeze. Bret. c'houeza, to breathe, blow, puff, swell.

Whelk. 1. AS. weoluc, weolc, a welk, wilk, shellfish.

2. A whelk is also a blow, a fall, and thence a mark, stripe, pimple. Whelker, a thump or blow; whelking, very large.—Hal. A modification of the word whack, representing the sound of a blow. Whacking, thumping, bouncing, strapping, are analogous expressions, conveying the sense of magnitude.
To Whelm.—Whelve. To whelm or whemble, to cover a thing by turning some vessel over it. 'Whelm that dish over them currants.'—Mrs Baker. To whawm, to overwhelm.—Hal.
To wabble, and with the nasal, wamble, is to move to and fro, up and down, to roll about ; Sc. whammle, to turn round.
Wi' her tail in her teeth she whammel'd it roun' Till a braid star drapt frae the lift aboon.
Du. wemelen, to palpitate, whirl, turn round.—Kil. Sc. womel, whimmil, NE. whemmle, to turn upside down.
And schyll Triton with his wyndy horne Over whemlyt all the flowand ocean. Bellenden in Jam.
The change from whemmle to whelm is an instance of an inversion that is very frequent in imitative forms. Thus we have G. schwappeln, parallel with Swiss schwalpen, to splash ; and E. wabble is synonymous with wallop ; potwobbler and potwalloper are used indifferently.
Again the same kind of inversion leads from our original wabble to OHG. walbon, to roll, to turn round ; whence varwalbnussi, subversion, turning upside down ; sinwelbe, spherical, round ; AS. hwealf, convex ; Da. hvælve, to arch, vault, turn bottom upwards ; Sw. hvalfwa, to roll, turn, change, vault ; ON. hvelfa, hvalfa, to turn over, to vault. In Staffordshire to wharve is to turn a vessel upside down in order to cover something. To whave, to cover or hang over.—Hal.
Whelp. ON. hvelpr, OHG. hwelf, MHG. welf, the young of dogs, lions, bears, &c. Welfen, to bear young.
Weckerlein ist auf das bett gesprungen. Hat darauf gewelft seine jungen. Hans Sachs in Schm.
Perhaps the noun may be from the verb, and not vice versa. G. werfen, to cast, is used in the special sense of casting young. Die Hündinn hat geworfen, sie hat sechs junge geworfen : the bitch has whelped. — Küttn. To warp in the S. of England is to cast a foal ; in N.E. to warp eggs, to lay eggs. The same interchange of r and l is seen in the parallel forms of AS. hwearfian and hwealfian, to turn.
Wherkened. Choked. To wherk, to breathe with difficulty, properly to make a noise in breathing. ON. kverk, throat ; Da. kværke, to choke.

Wherret. 1. A box on the ear ; something to make the ear whirr.
2. To wherret, to harass, to tease. Perhaps like whartle, whartwhartle, to cross, to tease (Hal.), a development of E. dial. whart, thwart, cross. Overwhart, overthwart, across.—Forby. Wart, to overturn, to plow land across.—Hal.
To Whet. ON. hvass, hvatr, OberD. wass, wets, sharp ; ON. hveitja, G. wetzen, Du. wetten, to whet, to sharpen. OHG. wasso sehan, to look sharp ; wassida, sharpness, edge.
Whether. Goth. hvathar, AS. hwæther, which of two, from hva, which, who.
* Whey. AS. hwæg, Du. wey. The Netherlandish forms waddik, wadeke, waltke, wakke, wæke, waje, G. dial. wassich, wessig, point to a derivation from Goth. vato, water, as signifying the watery part of milk.
Which. Goth. hvileiks, what-like ; as suchsveleiks, so-like. OFris. hwelik, hulk, hwek, huk, hoek, which.
Whiff. A breath of air, a word like puff, huff, fuff, formed in imitation of the sound of blowing. W. chwnff, a quick gust ; chwiffio, to puff, whiff, hiss ; chwyth, a puff, blast, breath. See Waft.
To Whiffle. Properly to blow in whiffs, to blow unsteadily, to veer about, to trifle. 'Two days before this storm began the wind whiffled about to the south, and back again to the east, and blew very faintly.'—Dampier in R. 'Versatile whifflings and dodgings.'—Barrow.
Du. weyfelen fluctuare, inconstantem esse, omni vento versari ; weyfeler homo inconstans, versatilis, levis. — Kil. NE. whiffle-whaffle, nonsense.—Hal.
* Whiffler. An officer who heads a procession and clears the way for it. Which like a mighty whiffler 'fore the King Seems to prepare his way.—Hen. V.
The whifflers in the civic processions at Norwich carry swords which they brandish as if for clearing the way. The name may thus be derived from waving or brandishing.
Whig. 1. A drink prepared from fermented whey. W. chwig, fermented, sour ; whey fermented with sweet herbs.—Spurrell.
2. A bun. Bav. wegg, wegk, week, a wedge, a wedge of butter or of dough, a roll. Du. wegghe, wigghe, a wedge, thence a mass, an oblong cake of bread or of butter.—Kil.
While. Goth. hveila, hour, time ; hveilan, to rest, to cease; gahveilaus, repose, rest. ON. hvila, to rest; hvila, W. gwely, a bed. OFris. hvila, to remain, delay. AS. on dæges hwile, in a day's space; tha hwile, the while, so long as. Du. wiile, a moment, space of time, leisure, vacant time. Lett. walla, leisure, space of time, respite, permission. Wallas deena, a vacant day; wallas sirgs, an unoccupied or resting horse; man nawa wallas, I have no time. Lith. walanda, a while, an hour, time. It would seem from the foregoing that the sense of a space of time springs from the notion of repose or rest, but a different origin is suggested by W. chwyl, a turn, a course, an event, a while, and as an adverb, while, as long as. Chwylfa, an orbit; chwylo, to turn, revolve, run a course. Boh. chwile, time, leisure; Pol. chwila, a moment, time.

Whilom. AS. hwilon, hwilum, sometime, for a time. Du. wijlen, wijlent, G. weiland, formerly, sometime.

Whim. 1.—Whims.—Wim.—Wimble. Whim, wim, a drum or capstan drawn by horses for winding ore out of a mine; whims, a windlass; wimble, an auger. A windlass or capstan and an auger are all implements that produce their effect by turning round. Bav. wimmen, wimmeln, wamszeln, wimszeln, wumszeln, to stir, to be in multifarious movement. Du. wemelen, to palpitate, vibrate, be in quick and light movement, to drive round, turn round, thence to bore with an auger; weme, a wimble or auger. Parallel forms are Fr. gimbelet, Langued. jhimbelet, a gimlet; jhimbla, to twist.

The syllables whip, quip, swip represent a smart stroke, a light quick turn or movement. Thus we have Da. vippe, to seesaw, rock, tilt up; Du. wippen, to skip, to twinkle, totter, kick suddenly up; wip, a swing, a lift, a trice, the swipe of a well; E. whip, to strike with a rod, to do anything with a quick and nimble movement, to draw up by means of a pulley; W. chwip, a quick turn; chwipyn, a sudden turn, an instant; chwipio, to whip, to move briskly. Then with a nasalisation of the root, G. wimpern, Du. wimpoogen, to wink or blink the eyes; G. augenwimper, the eyelid; W. chwimp, chwimpyn, a quick turn. The final mute is then lost, leaving an m as the representative of the original p. Thus we arrive at ON. hvim, a quick movement; at hvima augunom, to move the eyes about; Da. vimse, to skip to and fro; W. chwim, motion, impulse; chwimio, chwimlo, to move round quickly; Du. wemelen, to palpitate, twinkle, whirl, turn.—Kil.

Whim. 2.—Whimsey. Whim, a maggoty fancy or conceit, a freakish humour.—B. Properly an impulse proceeding from some internal buzzing or stirring in the brain that absorbs the attention of the agent and renders him deaf to rational inducements. G. wimmen, wimmeln, to stir; OSw. hwimla, to wriggle, stir, or crawl; thet hwimlar i hufwudet, my head is dizzy, I have a buzzing in my brain; hwimska, folly. Da. dial. hvimle, to have a swimming in the head; kvimvielhovedet, hvims, giddy, dizzy. Swiss wimseln, to be in a state of multitudinous movement; wimselsinnig, crack-brained, whimsical. Da. vimse, to skip to and fro. ON. hvim, a light movement.

' Gad, my head begins to whim it about—why dost thou not speak? thou art both as drunk and as mute as a fish.'—Congreve in R. But I forget my business. I thank ye, Monsieurs, I have a thousand whimseys in my brain now. B & F. in R.

To Whimper. G. wimmern, Bav. wimszeln, to cry in a subdued way. E. dial. wipping, the chirping of birds, weeping, crying.—Hal. Fin. wipuli, crying, weeping.

A high-pitched cry is represented by the syllables cheep, peep, weep. The lapwing is called weep from its plaintive cry. Sc. wheep, to squeak, to give a sharp whistle; to wheeple, to whistle in an inefficient manner. Da. dial. hveppe, hvuppe, wuppe, to yelp; hvippe, to chirp.

Whin. Properly waste growth, weeds, but now appropriated to gorse or furze. Whinnes or hethe, bruyere.—Palsgr. Bret. c'houenna, to hoe, to weed. W. chwyno, to weed; chwyn, weeds.

To Whine. Goth. quainon, ON. kveina, kveinka, to weep, lament; Bav. quenern, quenken, quenkeln, to whimper; Da. hvine, to whistle as the wind; G. weinen, Du. weenen, to weep, to cry; Sc. hune, to emit a querulous sound, as children in ill humour. W. cwyno, to complain, bewail. Fin. winistd, to whistle as the wind; winkua, to whimper; Esthon. wingma, to whimper, whine, creak.

To Whinge.—Whinyard. Whinge, to whine, to sob.—Hal. A whinging blow, a sounding blow. Hence a whinger, a weapon, something large and strong. ' I have heard it in Suffolk,' says Moor, ' as well in the sense given [a weapon] as of other large strong things, a girl particularly—and swinger, also.' To swinge, to beat; swinging, great, tretremendous, as a swinging lie, a swinging frost. Swinger, anything large and heavy.
From whinger in the sense of a sword, when the radical sense was forgotten, were probably developed both hanger and whiniard.
Whinny.—Whinner. To neigh. Lat. hinnire.

To Whip. A light, quick movement is widely represented by the syllables whip, wip, swip, as a heavier blow by the force of the broad vowel in whap, swap. To whip is to do anything by a rapid swing of the arm or any quick, short movement, and the term is thence applied to reciprocating or circular movement. Du. wippen, to dangle, swing, skip, do anything in a hurry, seesaw; to twinkle, to flog—Kil.; wip, a trice, a moment; wippe, a whip, the swipe of a well; wipsteert, a wagtail; wipplank, a seesaw; wipbrug, a draw-bridge; Sw. wippkärra, a tumbrel; Da. vippe, to seesaw, bob, rock, wag. Pl.D. wuppen, to move up and down; wuppe, any contrivance for letting up and down, a crane, a tumbrel; wuppeln, wippem, wippern, to set a swinging; wips! quick! ON. hvipp, a quick movement. Da. dial. hvibber, quick; hvibbre, to turn to and fro, to whip a child. Fin. wippera, quick; wippota, to whirl round; wipu, a crane. W. chwip, a quick flirt or turn; quick, instantly; chwipio, to whip, to move briskly; chwipyn, an instant. Gael. cuip, a whip or lash, a trick.
Then with an initial sibilant, ON. svipa, to whip, move quickly, do anything rapidly; to waver; svipall, unsteady, movable; svipan, svipr, a rapid movement, an instant; svipta, to whip out or in, to snatch; Da. dial. svippe, to move hastily; svip, an instant, a moment; E. dial. swipper, nimble, quick; swippo, supple; swipe, the handle of a pump, the lever by which a bucket is let up and down into a well.

To Whir.—Whur.—Whirl.—Whorl. The syllables whirr, whur, hurr, swir, are used to represent a humming noise, as of a wheel in rapid movement, the rising of partridges or pheasants in the air, the snarling of a dog, &c. Then from representing the sound the word is used to signify the motion by which the sound is produced; whirling, turning rapidly round. The final l only indicates continuance or action without altering the sense.
We may cite OE. hurron or bombon as bees: bombizo.—Pr. Pm. I hurle, I make a noise as the wind doth: Je bruis.—Palsgr. Sw. hurra, to whirl; surra, to hum, buzz, whizz; sivirra, to whistle; Da. hurre, surre, to buzz, hum; svire, to whirl; Da. dial. hvirrelsyg, giddy, dizzy; hvirreltrind, completely round; hvirrelwind, a whirlwind. Fris. harre, herre, horre, to turn about; Da. dial. hverre, to turn, to change; Pl.D. hverresteen, a grindstone. E. dial. swir, to whirl about; swirl, a whirling motion. Fr. virer, to turn round; Rouchi virler, to roll. Esthon. wirroma, Pol. wirować, to whirl; wir, a whirlpool, eddy. W. chwyrnu, to whizz, to snore, to snarl, to move with rapidity; chwyrnell, a whirl, a whirligig.
As the representative syllable is strengthened by a final n in W. chwyrn, it takes a final labial in Sw. hwirfla, to beat a roll on the drum, to whirl; hwirfvel, a roll on the drum, a whirlwind, whirlpool; Du. werwel, worwel, G. wirbel, vertex, vortex, gyrus, turbo, repagulum (Kil.), what turns to and fro, or turns round; wervelen, to whirl. In Lat. vertere, to turn, the root takes a final l.

Whisk.—Whisp. The syllable whisk or whisp, like G. watsch! witsch! wutsch! wisch! husch! ritsch! (Sanders), represents the sound of a light or fine body moving rapidly through the air. Witsch! fiel es mir aus den händen: Wutsch! waren sie fort. Hence witschen, wischen, and E. whisk, to do anything with a light quick movement. Wischen, davon wischen, to slip, to whisk away; wischen, to whisk or wipe; wisch, a bunch of something for whisking or wiping. Sw. wiska, to whisk, wipe, dust, to wag the tail; wiska, a duster, a whisk, a wisp of straw. Fin. huiska, a whisk, duster; huiskata, to run to and fro; huiskuttaa, to vibrate, to shake as a dog his tail, to sprinkle water.
The equivalence of the sounds whisk and whisp in representing sounds made by the motion of the air is shown by E. whisper, compared with ON. hviskra, Sw. hwiska, to whisper. The radical syllable represents the sound of switching through the air in Du. wispelen, kwispelen, to swish or switch, to scourge with rods, to wag the tail, to rub with a brush; kwispel, a switch, a tuft, a tassel; Sw. wispa, to whip, to whip cream; wispaktig, inconstant; Swiss wispeln, to move to and fro, to be in constant motion. G. wipps! interj. representing quick movement. 'Wipps! hat er 's weg.' Wipsen, to whisk, slip away.

A whisp or wisp of straw is then a parallel form with whisk, and signifies a handful of straw for whisking or wiping. Whiskers. Bushy tufts of hair on the cheeks of a man. See Whisk. Whiskey. Gael. uisge, water; uisge-beatha (pronounced ushga-bhéa), usque-baugh, whiskey. Whisper. The sound made by a light movement of the air is represented by various forms in which the sibilant is the principal element; G. flispern, fispeln, lispeln, pispern, zispern, to whisper. 'Wis, wis, wis!' wispelt immer hin und machet kein wort.'—Schm. Bav. wispeln, wispern, to hiss, whistle, whisper; wisperle, a light breath of air.

Whist. The interjection commanding silence was written st! by the Romans. In It. it is zitto! and pissi-pissi! is used for the same purpose; Fr. chut! G. st! hist! bst! pst! bsch! ps! The original intention of the utterance is to represent a slight sound, such as that of something stirring, or the breathing or whispering of some one approaching. Something stirs! Listen! Be still. It. non fare un zitto, not to make the slightest noise; non sentirse un zitto, not to hear a leaf stir. Pissi-pissi! hst! hsht! still! also a low whispering; pissipissare, to psh, to husht, also to buzz or whisper very low. That Fr. chut! represents a similar sound is shown by the verb chu-chotter, to whisper, to mutter. Sc. whish, whush, a rushing or whizzing sound; to whish, to hush. AS. hwæstran, E. dial. whister, to whisper. The game of whist is so called from the silent attention which it requires.

Whistle. The sound made by the rushing of air is represented by the syllables whis, whisp, whisk, whist, &c. AS. hweosan, ON. hvæsa, Bret. c'houeza, to wheeze, breathe audibly, to blow, to hiss. Sw. hwissla, to hiss, to whistle. See Whist, Whisper.

Whit. A small part.—B. AS. wiht, wuht, uht, a creature, animal, thing; Goth. vaiht, a thing; ni-vaiht, OHG. nio-wiht, nought, nothing; OHG. iowiht, MHG. ieht, iht, ought; OHG. wihtir, animals.

The use of whit in the sense of an atom or least bit is in accordance with several other instances where words in the first instance representing a slight sound are applied to a slight movement, and then to a small bodily object. Thus from G. muck, signifying in the first instance a sound barely audible, is formed mücken, to mutter, to utter a slight sound, also to stir, to make the least movement. The representative syllable takes the form of mick or kick in Du. noch micken noch kicken, not to utter a sound. Thence passing to the idea of movement it forms Du. micken, to wink; Lat. micare, to vibrate, twinkle, glitter. The analogy is then carried a step further, and the sense of a slight movement is made a stepping-stone to the signification of a material atom, a small bodily object. Hence Lat. and It. mica, Sp. miga, Fr. mie, a crumb, a little bit, and It. cica, Fr. chic, a little bit, Sp. chico, small.

The use of the syllables mot or tot to represent the least sound is exemplified in E. mutter, to utter low broken sounds, and in the It. expression non fare ne motto ne totto, not to utter a syllable. Hence Fr. mot, a word, a particle of speech, and (passing to the sense of bodily substance) E. mote, an atom or particle of body; Du. mot, dust, fragments; It. motta, Fr. motte, a lump of earth.

In like manner from E. dial. whitter, to murmur, grumble, complain (Mrs Baker), whitterwhatter, to whisper (Hal.), Sc. whitter, quitter, to warble, chatter, and thence to vibrate or quiver as the tongue of an adder, we pass to whitters, fragments—Hal., to whitter, to fritter away.—Jam. Sup. Sw. dial. quittra, a little bit, a small fragment of stone. Again, we have twitter, to chirp, to giggle—Mrs Baker; twittle, twattle, twit cum twat, chatter, idle talk—Hal.; twit, the short intermittent chirp of a bird—Mrs Baker; to twitter, to tremble, to shiver; twitters, shivers, fragments.

White. Goth. hveits, ON. hvitr, G. weiss, Sanscr. çvita.

Whitlow. The true form of the word is probably preserved in NE. whickflaw, a flaw or sore about the quick of the nail. Whick, quick, alive; whit, quick.—Hal. The intermediate form whitflaw is found in Holland and Wiseman. 'They cure whitflawes, risings and partings of the flesh and skin about the nail roots.'—Holland, Pliny in R. 'Paronychia—is a small swelling about the nails and ends of the fingers—; by the vulgar people amongst us it is generally called a whitflaw.'—Wiseman. It is however called blanc-doigt at Lille, Fr. doigt blanc, from the white colour of the swelling.—Patois de Flandre Fr.

Whitsunday. Dominica in albis, so called from the admission of the catechumens clothed in white robes to the sacraof baptism on the eve of this festival.—Bailey.
To Whittle.—Thwite. NE. to white or thwite, to cut away by bits. ' He has thwitten a mill-post to a pudding-prick.'—Ray. 'I thwyte a stycke, or I cutte lytell peces from a thynge.'—Palsgr. AS. sponas thweotan, to cut chips.
To whittle is the frequentative form of the foregoing, and is used in the same sense. ' The Pierce administration, which came into power with a majority of eighty, has now been whittled down to ten.'—Bartlett. To whittle sticks, to cut sticks for amusement. A saddle which pinches the shoulder whittles the skin; a shoe working against a stocking whittles a hole in it.—Mrs Baker. Whittle, thwittle, a knife. The radical meaning of the word is to reduce a thing to whits or bits, to fritter it away. Sc. whitter, to lessen by taking away small portions.—Jam. Sup. The double form of whittle and thwittle is explained by the fact that both whitters and twitters are provincially used in the sense of fragments.—Hal. See Whit.
Whittle. A blanket, or large shawl, named, like the word blanket itself, from being made of white or undyed wool.
Whizz. A word like fizz or hiss, formed from the sound it is intended to represent.
Who. Goth. hvas, hvo, hva, who, what; hvadre, whither; hvar, where; hvaiva, how; hvan, when. Sanscr. kas, who; Lat. quis, qui, who; w. pwy, who, what; pa, what, how.
Whole. Entire, unbroken, sound, in good health. See Hale.
To Whoop. Fr. houper, to whoop unto or call afar off. A representation of a clear, high-pitched cry, such as is heard in the whooping or hooping cough. From a cry of this nature we have Goth. vopjan, to call, to cry out; AS. wop, cry, lamentation; Illyrian vap, call; vapiti, to cry out; Russ. vopl, cry; voplif, to cry, make an outcry, lament; vopif, to call out, to cry. The initial w is lost in ON. op, cry; apa, to shout, showing the origin of Gr. oψ, voice, and ἔπω, to say. The change from a labial to a guttural final, according to the usual genius of the language, gives Lat. voco, to call, and vox, voice.
Whore. AS. hure, commonly explained from AS. hyran, Du. hueren, to hire, in accordance with Lat. meretrix, from mereor, to earn. But a more lively figure would be afforded by comparison with animal life, as the names of the dog, bitch, vixen or she-fox, hog, pig, mule, ass, are used to indicate varieties of human character. In like manner the name of whore may perhaps be taken from the habits of domestic fowls, where one male frequents a number of females. Pol. kur, a cock; kura, a hen; kurwa, a prostitute; kurestwo, fornication.
Whort.—Whortleberry. AS. heortberg (hart-berry), the bilberry. In the South of E. they are called hurts.
Why. AS. hwi, the instrumental case of hwa, what. For hwi, for what [reason]. In the same way for thi signified for that reason, on that account.
Agayne hym thai ware all irows : Forthi thai set thame hym to ta Intil Perth, or than hym sla.—Wyntown.
Nochtforthi, nevertheless.
Wick. The analogy of ON. kveikr, wick, kveikja, to kindle, quicken, set light to, would seem to justify the explanation of wick as the part of the candle which quickens into life. E. dial. wick, alive. Lith. wykis, life. But the word has a more general meaning, seeming radically to signify a tuft or bunch of some fibrous material. Du. wiecke, a wick, a tent for a wound; G. wicke, lint, scraped linen to put into a wound; wicklein, a tent. Bav. wicke, the hair of the head; wickel, a handful, bunch of flax, so much as is wound (gewickelt) on the distaff at once; wickel, familiarly, a wig. Ain wikhel oder zachen, a wick. Swab. wicken, wick. G. wickeln, to wrap up. In like manner Fr. mèche signifies as well a wick as a lock of hair. Pol., Bohem. knot, a wick, a match, a tent for a wound, may probably be explained as a knot of fibrous material.
Wicked. The origin of this word, which has no equivalent in the cognate languages, seems preserved in Esthon. wigga, wikka, spot, fault, injury; Fin. wika, a bodily defect, then a moral fault. Wikainen, faulty, guilty; wiatoin, innocent. Lap. wikke, fault, cause; wikkalats, guilty; wikketebme, innocent. Ah le wikka, there is no fault in him.
Wicker. From Da. veg, provincially vog, pliant, are formed voge, vøgger, vegre, a pliant rod, a withy, whence vogekurv, vøgrekurv, a wicker basket; væger, vægger, z. willow. Da. væge, to bend; vægne etsom, to clinch a nail. Sw. wika, to pleat, to fold. See Weak.
Wicket. Du. wiket, winket, Fr. guichet, a little door within a gate, for the convenience of easier opening. Wykett or lytylle wyndowe, fenestra, fenestrella.—Pr. Pm. Doubtless from the notion of rapid movement to and fro. The wicket at the game of cricket is a narrow frame of rods stuck in the ground, which is constantly being bowled over and set up again. A short quick movement is represented by the syllables wik, whick, quick. ON. hvika, to totter, waver; hvikeygdr, having an unsteady glance; hvikull, unsteady, flighty; vik, a start, a slight movement; Du. wicken, vibrare—Kil.; wikken, to weigh in the hand, i. e. to move up and down. Wink, a vibration of the eyelid, is a nasalised form of the same root.

Wide. AS. wid, G. weit, ON. víðr, broad, ample, spacious; Fr. vide, empty. See Void.

Widow. AS. wuduwe, a widower; wuduwe, Goth. viduvo, G. witwe, Lat. vidua, a widow. Sanscr. vidhavá, a widow, is explained from vi, without, and dhava, a husband. So sadhavá, a woman whose husband is living. On the other hand, from W. gwedd, a yoke or pair, we have dyweddio, to yoke together, to espouse; gweddawg, coupled, yoked, wedded; gweddw, fit to be connected, marriageable, single, solitary; eidion gweddw, an ox without a fellow; gwas gweddw, a single man; dyn weddw, a single person; dynes weddw, a single woman; gwr gweddw, a widower; gwraig weddw, a widow.

Wield. Goth. valdan, AS. wealdan, ON. valda, Da. volde, Lith. valdyti, Illyrian vladati, Russ. vladjet, to rule, dispose of.

Wife.—Woman. AS., ON. wif, OHG. wib, wip, G. weib, woman, wife. The two sexes were distinguished in AS. as wæpned-man, weaponed, and wifman. Wæpned-bearn, wæpned-cild, a male child; wifcild, a female child. God híg geworhte, wæpned and wimman: God created them male and female.—Mark 10. 6. Gebletsode metod alwihta wif and wæpned: the lord of all things blessed female and male.—Cædm. 10. 131. As the sword and the distaff were taken on the continent as the type of the two sexes, it was supposed that the weapon was here used in the same sense, while wife was explained from weaving taken as the characteristic function of the female. But in AS. wæpned the weapon is certainly metaphorical. Veretrum, wæpen-gecynd.—Ælfr. Veretrum, teors; calamus, teors. WILD that wæpen.—AS. Vocab. in Nat. Antiq.

It was to be expected that the distinctive names of man and woman should be taken in the first instance from their physical construction. The woman would be viewed as the child-bearing, and the word wife would be satisfactorily explained if it could be identified with womb, Goth. vamba, Sc. wame, the belly, womb, bowels. Now Lap. waimo, is the heart (originally perhaps the belly in general, as W. calon, the heart, womb—Richards); wuolle-waimo (wuolle, lower), the groin, genitals (in male or female), while Fin. waimo is a woman, wife. Sanscr. váma, an udder, a woman. Bret. gwamm, wife.

From AS. wifman it was an easy corruption to wimman, wumman, woman. The king hire wende to As wæpmon scolde to wummon do. Layamon II. 376.

Wig. Commonly supposed to be a contraction from periwig. It is more probable however that periwig is an accommodation of Fr. perruque, under the influence of the word wig already existing in the language. Bav. wickel, a bunch of flax or tow, and fig. a wig; wicke, the hair of the head. Wikk, floccus—Schottel, cited in Hess. Idioticon. G. wickeln, to twist, to wrap; wickelzopf, a tress or lock of hair. See Wick.

Wight. 1.—Wighty.—Wigger. Active, swift, strong. Wyte (wyght) or deliver, agilis, velox.—Pr. Pm. Y schalle gyf the two grehowndys As wyghte as any roo.—MS. in Hal. Sw. wig, wiger, nimble, active, quick. Wig at swara, ready to answer. Wara wiger i mun, to be supple of mouth, ready of speech. Wight, nimbly. Da. dial. vögger, a pliable rod. G. wacker, brisk, agile, stirring, vigorous.

Wight. 2. A creature, a man. Du. wicht, a child. G. bösewicht, a wicked man. See Whit.

Wild.—Will. ON. villr, wandering at large; villa, error; villa, to mislead; villask, to lose one's way, to miss; villurad, bewildering counsel; villutru, false belief. Da. vild, wild, savage; vilde, to mislead; fare vild, to go astray; tale vildt, to talk wildly. Sc. will, confused, bewildered, at a loss; to go will, to go astray; I'm will what to do, I am at a loss. Will af rede, at a loss for counsel; will af wane, at a loss what to look to, what course to take (from ON. ván, von, expectation, hope), and not, as Jamieson explains it, at a loss for a habitation. Will, desert, trackless. OE. wylgate or wrong gate, deviacio.—Pr. Pm. w. gwill, one that strays about, a vagabond; gwill mer, a pirate. Lap. willet, to wander. Russ. wild', to turn, whirl, turn aside, turn hither and thither, not keep the straight course.
A rational origin may be found in Sw. willer-waller, confusion, disorder, imbroglio, tumult, medley, probably from the figure of boiling water; willa, perplexity, confusion, distraction of mind, illusion, error; gå i willa, not to know what one is about, to wander about. G. wallen, to wallop, bubble up, boil, be in violent motion. Let. willu, wilt, to deceive; wiltus, fraud, treachery, deceit.
Wile. OE. wigele, wihele, trick. Ygeme wes mid childe by Uther kinge Al thurh Merlines wigel.—Layamon II. 384. His wigeles and his wrenches.'—Ancren Riwle. AS. wiglian, to juggle, divine, soothsay; wigelere, a conjurer, soothsayer, wizard. Russ. figlj, juggling, sleight of hand; figlar', a juggler, conjurer; Pol. figiel, trick, prank, frolic; figlować, to frolic, to play tricks. The radical signification seems to be to deceive the eyes by sleight of hand, to dazzle by rapid movement. Movement to and fro is represented by the expressions wiggle-waggle, widdle-waddle. Pl.D. wigelwageln, to waver to and fro. '—and wigeleth as vordrunken mon that haveth imunt to vallen.'—Ancr. Riwle. To diddle is explained by Jam. to shake, to jog, and to diddle one out of a thing is to trick him out of it. To widdle, to wriggle, to move to and fro, then to diddle or wile.
Its Antichrist his pipes and fiddles, And other tools wherwith he widdles Poor caitiffs into dark confusions. Cleland in Jam. w. chwid, a quick turn; chwido, to make a quick move, to juggle; chwidog, a conjurer. In like manner Bav. gigkeln, to quiver, to move rapidly to and fro, shows the origin of Pl.D. gigeln, begigeln, Du. beguichelen, begoochelen, beghiilen, to delude, beguile, bewitch. Lith. wylus, deceit, guile; willu, wilti, to deceive; willoti, to entice, beguile, deceive; Let. wilt, to deceive; wiltus, trick, cunning, deceit.
Will. Goth. viljan, OHG. willan, G. wollen, ON. vilja, Gr. βούλομαι, Lat. volo, velle, to have will, to be desirous of. Lith. weliti, to have rather, to wish; OSlav. voliti, to will, Russ. volja, will, wish, consent.

Willow. AS. welig, wilig, Pl.D. wilge, wichel, a willow.
Wimble. 1. An auger. See Whim 1. 2. Active, agile.
He was so wimble and so wight From bough to bough he leaped light. Sheph. Calendar.
From the same expression of rapid movement to and fro or round about, as in the former sense of the word.
Wimple. Wympyl, peplum.—Pr. Pm. Fr. guimpe, guimple, a wrapper with which the nuns covered their chin and neck. Du. wimpel, velum, velamen; wimpelen, involvere, implicare, velare, velo operire.—Kil. Wimpel is also a streamer, a pennant.
The radical syllable wip, representing a short rapid movement, is used to signify reciprocating action, in Du. wippen, to swing, wag, seesaw. In the technical expression of whipping a cord with a thinner string or with thread, it signifies winding about or wrapping round, in accordance with the connection between the ideas of reciprocating and circular movement explained under Winch. And so in the nasalised form of the root the sense of reciprocating movement is expressed by Du. wimp-oogen, G. wimpern, to wink the eyes, and by wimpel, a streamer, while that of circular movement is found in Kilian's wimpelen, to wrap round, in E. wimple, a wrapper, and in wimble, an auger. See Whim.
To Win. Du. winnen, to gain, get, conquer, earn, to cultivate, till the ground, to procreate children. ON. vinna, to labour, get, earn. AS. winnan, to struggle, contend, toil, get by labour, gain.
To Wince.—Winch. 1. To kick. 'I wynche, as a horse doth: je regimbe.'—Palsgr.
2. Winch, a crank, a water-wheel. 'I wynche or wynde up with a wyndlasse: je guinde.'—Palsgr.
The syllables wick, quick, whick, or with the nasal, wink, quink, which probably in the first instance represent a sharp short cry, are used to signify a start or short sudden movement. Du. quicken, vibrare, librare, agitare, movere, mobilitare; quincken, micare, motitare.—Kil. ON. vik, a start, a slight movement aside; vikja, to set in motion, to turn aside, turn round; hvika, to totter. Sw. wicka, hvicka, hwinka, motitare, vacillare.—Ihre. Du. wicken, vibrare—Kil.; winken, to nod, to wink; to make a slight movement with the head or eyelid. w. gwing, a sudden motion, as a wince or wink of the eye ; gwingo, to spurn, fling, kick, struggle, wriggle ; gwingdin, the wagtail. Bret. gwinka, to kick ; Fr. guenchir, guincher, to start, shrink, winch or wrench aside, to wriggle.—Cot. Swiss winggen, to sprawl with hands and feet ; wingsen, winxen, wingsten, to kick.

As a body in turning round, when viewed from one instant to another, is seen moving in opposite directions, words signifying vibratory or reciprocating movement are frequently diverted to the sense of circular motion.

Thus Lat. vibrare has the sense of twist or turn round, in vibrati crines, curled hair. From Du. wikken, to move, we pass to wikkelen, to wrap up, enfold. Wemelen is explained by Kilian to palpitate, be in light and frequent motion, and also to whirl or turn round. And in the same way in the case of winch, the notion of turning on an axis is developed from that of a short rapid movement.

To Wind. Goth. vindan, ON. vinda, to wind, wrap round, twist ; vindr, crooked, wry ; venda, to turn, to twist. Sw. winda med ogonen, to squint ; wind, oblique, askew. Russ. wint', a screw ; wintit', to screw. Lith. wynoti, to wrap.

This appears to be one of the cases mentioned under Winch, in which the idea of turning round springs from that of moving to and fro. We use the interjectional expression widdle-waddle to signify a wavering movement to and fro. To waddle, to sway to and fro in walking, and provincially, to roll up and down in a disorderly way, to fold up, to entwine.—Hal. OHG. wadalon, to waver, wander, fluctuate ; wadalunga, ventilationem.—Graff. MHG. wadelen, to flutter, sway to and fro, fluctuate. Sc. widdil, to waddle, wriggle, writhe, winch. W. gwid, a quick whirl or twirl ; chwid, a quick turn ; chwido, to quirk, to juggle, to make a quick move ; Sc. quhid, whid, whud, to whisk, to move nimbly.

Then with the nasalisation of the vowel, OHG. wantalon, ventilare, volvere, volutare, fluctuare, mutare ; It. ventaglio, a fan ; G. wandeln, to go to and fro, to change ; wandelmuth, inconstant mind, to be compared with MHG. wadel, variable, inconstant. 'Sin herze was also wadel.' Sc. windle-strae, a dry stem of grass wavering to and fro.

Branchis brattling and blaiknyt schew the brayis, With hirstis harsk of waggand wyndilstraes. D. V. 202. 29.

Windle bears the same relation to waddle that wimple does to wabble. OHG. wintwanto, ventilabrum ; winton, ventilare ; winda, winta, flabrum, ventilabrum.—Schm. Bav. windel, swathings ; AS. windel (what is twined), a basket ; It. guindolare, to wind silk ; guindola, a reel ; ghindare, to draw up ; Bret. gwinta, to tilt up, to hoist ; porsgwint, Sw. windbro, a drawbridge.

Wind. Goth. vinds, ON. vindr, W. gwynt, Lat. ventus, wind ; ventilare, to swing or brandish in the air, to move to and fro, to fan. We need not suppose that ventilare is derived from ventus: on the contrary it appears to me that ventilare corresponds to OHG. wantalon, mentioned in the last article, which exhibits the idea in an earlier stage of development, signifying to sway to and fro. The name of the wind could not be taken from a more striking characteristic than its proverbial inconstancy and mobility.

A reduplicative form like E. pitapat, pintledepantledy, or OHG. wintwanto, ventilabrum (Schm. 4. 110), is always a sign of the feeling of direct representation. Winniwunt, aura ; winton, ventilare ; winta, winda, flabrum, ventilabrum. So from the unnasalised root wadalon, fluctuare, ventilare, seem to be formed OHG. giwaida, ventus ; giwado, afflatu, flatu aurae ; giwada, spiritum ; Bav. gewdden, schneegewdden, a snowdrift.

Windlas. Probably not a corruption from Du. windas, Fr. guindas, a winding axle, as often supposed, as the termination lace or lass is found in a similar sense in stricklace, an implement for striking.

Radius, a strike or stricklace which they use in measuring of corn.—Littleton Lat. Dict. A windlace was also a compas or winding course.

Amonge theis be appoynted a fewe horsemen to raunge somwhat abrode for the greater appearance, bidding them fetch a windlasse a great waye about, and to make al toward one place.—Golding, Caesar in R.

Window. ON. vindauga. Da. vindue, a window, literally wind-eye, an opening to admit the air ; ON. auga, eye.

Windrow. Hay or grass raked up into rows, in order to be dried by the wind before cocking up. Sc. winraw, hay or peats put together in long thin heaps for the purpose of being more easily dried. Probably the latter half of the word is an accommodation. Du. winddrooge, wind-dried, vento aliquantulum siccatus. Pl.D. windrog, wind-dr'dg (of linen), half-dried.

Wine. Gr. οἶνος, Lat. vinum, Goth. vein.

Wing. ON. vœngr, Sw. winge, Fris. winge, swinge (Outzen), G. schwingen, schwing federn, wing. Doubtless from the vibratory action which is its characteristic function. W. gwingo, to kick, spring, fling, struggle; ON. vingsa, to swing, to dangle; Sw. swœnga, to wave, brandish, swing. In the same way from Fris. wjweckje, to swing, wjueck, wjuwcke, a wing; wjuwckjen, to fly.—Epkema. Du. wicken, vibrare (Kil.), wiek, wiecke, a wing.
Wink. The sound of a high-pitched note is represented by the syllables peep, gueek, tweet, and the like, the effect of which is not altered by the introduction of a nasal. We may cite W. gwich, a squeak or shrill noise; G. quieken, quietschen, to squeak, creak; E. dial. quinch, to make a noise—Hal.; Du. quinken, quinckelen, to warble; E. dial. whink, a sharp cry. The syllable representing a sharp note is then applied to signify a sharp short movement, a start, jerk. Thus we have Du. quicken, to vibrate, stir, move, weigh; quinken, to vibrate, twinkle; quikstaart, a wagtail; E. dial. quinch, to stir, twitch, jerk; whick, quick, lively; E. quick, rapid, agile, living; ON. hvika, to waver, shiver; vik, a start or flinch; Du. wicken, to vibrate, to weigh in the hands; W. gwing, a sudden motion, as a wince or wink of the eye, a motion, turn, or shake made with a spring; gwingdin (tin, tail), the wagtail; Fr. guenchir, to flinch or start aside; Du. wicket, or wincket, a wicket or little movable door; Sw. winka, to make a sign with the hand, head, or eye.
To Winnow. AS. windwian, Bav. winden, Lat. vannare, to winnow; OHG. wintôn, ventilare; wintwanto, ventilabrum; Bav. windel, It. ventaglio, a fan. See Wind.
Winter. Goth. vintrus, ON. vetr, winter. Perhaps connected with Pol. wiatr, Boh. wjtr, wind; G. wetter, storm, tempest, weather.
To Wipe. To sweep over a surface for the purpose of cleansing. Pl.D. wiep, a wisp of straw; afenwiep, a straw besom to sweep out an oven. Wipe is a modification of the root wip, whip signifying a short quick movement, as sweep is of the root swip, of the same signification with wip. Du. sweepen, to whip, to flog; ON. svipr, a short movement, twinkling of an eye, instant. The same train of thought is seen in G. wischen, to whisk or move with a quick and transitory motion; hinweg wischen, to whip off, to whisk away. Wischen is then to wipe, to rub; strohwisch, a wisp of straw, a handful of straw for rubbing down a horse. 'Wische,' says the Westerwald Idioticon, 'expresses a quick movement connected with a whizzing or swishing sound.' G. witsch! on a sudden, in a giffy. Pl.D. witsch! wips! quick. Wits! ware he weg! pop! he was off. Wipp-wapp, a seesaw.
Wire. ON. vir, virr, Pl.D. wire, wier-draad, wire. ON. at draga i virinn, to wiredraw, to protract, to be niggardly; viravirki, filigree. Da. dial. vire, something twisted together, a twisted wire. From Sw. wira, to twist; Da. virre, Du. wieren, to whirl, turn, twist.
Wise. I. G. weise, way, method, fashion, way or manner of proceeding, course.—Kütn. Fr. guise, manner, fashion, custom, usage; W. gwis, mode, custom; Bret. giz, kiz, manner, fashion, usage. Esthon., Fin. wisi, wise, manner. The original meaning of the word would seem to be way, track, footsteps; of which sense traces are to be found in Bret. mond war he giz, to go on his footsteps or on his traces, to turn back; kiza, to return. It will be observed that we use way in the same sense as wise. In no way, in no wise. From the sense of track or way also may be explained OHG. wisgan, to show, guide, teach; G. weisen, to point out, to show. Jemanden zurecht weisen, to show one the right way. Swiss wisen, to guide, to govern; ON. visi, a leader, governor. It may be however that these forms are to be explained from the sense of making to see. Etwas weis werden, to be apprised of a thing, to get knowledge of it. Einem etwas weis machen, to make one believe a thing. Goth. vitan, to look, observe, perceive.
Wise. 2.—Wit. Goth. vitan, pret. vissa, AS. witan, pret. wiste, wisse, G. wissen, ON. vita, to know. Goth. unvits, unweis, unwise, foolish; unviss, uncertain; hintarveis, cunning; unfaurveis, unforeseen. E. wit, wot, to know. E. wits, the senses, faculties of perception; ON. vitr, knowing, vitugr, viskr (for vitskr), AS. vita, wise, counsellor. W. gwydd, a state of recognition or knowledge, presence; dos o 'm gwydd! go from my presence, get out of my sight; Gwyddfa, a place of presence; gwyddiad, a knowing; gwyddwg, knowledge, perception; Gael. fios, intelligence, knowledge, notice; thoir fios, to give notice, equivalent to G. weis machen. The fact most completely known is what takes place before our eyes; according to the proverb, Seeing is believing. Hence the connection between words signifying knowledge and seeing. Lat. videre, visum, to see; Gr. ἴδια, ἰδέα, see, perceive, know; Boh. vidjeti, to see; vjeděti, to know; Sanscr. vid, know.
Wish. ON. osk, wish, desire; askja, yskja, AS. wiscan, to wish; G. wunsch, wish; wunschen, Da. önske. Boh. winsšowati, to wish; Pol. winszować, to congratulate, wish joy.
Witch. AS. wicce, Fris. wikke, a witch. Pl.D. wikken, to soothsay, divine. Sik wikken laten, to have one's fortune told. Wikker, wikkerske, a male or female soothsayer.
The radical sense is shown in Du. wikken, to weigh in the hand, and thence to consider, conjecture, predict. ' 'Tis eene zaak die gy wel behoort te wikken eer gy ze aanvaard:' it is a thing you ought well to consider before you answer. — Halma. Dit ongeluk is my gewikt:' this misfortune was foretold me.
Hesse, wicken, to shake to and fro; wickelen, to enchant; wickeler, a soothsayer (ariolus).
To Wite. To reproach. AS. witan, to perceive, to know, then to ascribe to, impute, blame; ære witan, to honour. Goth. vitan, to look; idveit, blame. OHG. witzan, to impute, reproach, blame, mhg. wizzen, to reproach, find fault, punish. ' Was hâst du mir gewizzen daz du mîn kint erslagen hâst:' what fault hast thou found in me that thou hast slain my child? Comp. Lat. animadvertere, to perceive, and thence to punish. Da. kjende, mark, sign; tage kjende paa, to take note of; kjende, to know, to pass sentence on. So also Fr. savoir bon gré, G. dank wissen, to take a thing kindly, to impute it to him as an obligation.
With. AS. with, ON. við. Da. ved, against, opposite, towards, near. AS. wither, ON. viðr, against, opposite; G. wider, against; wieder, again.
Perhaps the radical idea may be looking at, facing, in face. w. gwydd, presence; yngwydd, before or in presence.
Withe. — Withy. ON. viðir. Da. vidie, vie, AS. withig, G. weide, wiede, an osier willow; ON. vidia, Sc. widdie, woodie, Bav. wid, widen, widlein (wi', win', widl', wi'l'), a band of twisted twigs; OHG. wid, retorta. The Craven Gloss. explains widdy, twigs of willows or hazles dried partially in the fire and then twisted into wreaths for many agricultural purposes.
Lap. wedde, a tough twig of root for making baskets; weddet, to bind. Goth. gavidan, to bind together; OHG. wettan, wetian, giwetan, to join, to bind.
The final d of the root is lost in Lat. viere, to weave or plait, and thence vimen, a pliant twig or osier. Lith. vyju, vyti, to twist, wind; wytis, a withe, a hoop for a cask; Lett. wiju, wiht, to twine, plait, pleach; wihtes, a hopbine; wihtols, a willow; Pol. wić, to wind, twine, twist, wreathe; wid, an osier twig; witwa, witwina, osier, wicker.
The ultimate origin is probably the representation of a whizzing sound, applied to rapid movement through the air, rushing, whirling, twisting, turning in and out. E. dial. whither, to whizz—Hal.; AS. hweotheran, to murmur; Sc. quidder, quhethir, to whizz, to rush; ON. hviðra, to rush; E. dial. whidder, to quake, to shiver; Sc. widdill, to wriggle, writhe, winch; E. twiddle, to twist or move to and fro between the fingers; quhid, whid, a quick movement; in a whid, in a moment; w. gwid, a quick turn or whirl; chwid, a quick turn; chwido, to quirk, to juggle, to make a quick movement; chwidro, to move giddily. See Wattle, Wind.
To Wither. NFris. waddern, G. wittern, to dry by exposure to sun and air, to weather. Now the consequence of drying a thing like hay is to make it shrivel up and wither.
But a different line of descent seems indicated by w. gwidd, what is dried or withered; gwiddon, small particles of what is dried or rotted, mites; gwiddoni, to dry up, wither, rot; gwiddan, a witch or hag; Pol. wiednąć, to fade, to wither; wiedina, a hag; It. guizzo, vizzo, faded, withered.
* Withers. G. rist, widerrist, the shoulders of a horse, the joint by which he exerts his force against (G. wider) the draught of the carriage. In the N. of E. withers are the barbs of an arrowhead or jags which prevent the shank of a gatecrook or the like from being drawn out of the wood in which it is fixed. AS. witherian, to resist, oppose.—Atkinson.
Witness. From AS. witan, to perceive, have experience of, know, we have gewita, a witness, one who has actual experience of a fact; witnesse, gewitnyss, OHG. gewiznesse, ON. vitni, experience, and thence testimony, evidence; vitna, Da. vidne, to give evidence, to depose;

ON. vitneskja, intelligence, notice, warn-ing. See Wit.
Wittering. A hint or notice of a thing. ON. vita, to wit, to have notice or knowledge of; vitr, having knowledge or understanding, wise; vitra, to give notice of, to reveal, display; N. vitr, warning or sign of an event; vitra, vittre, to give warning or notice of, to let one know; vitring, warning, information, knowledge.
Wittol. — Witwall. — Wodewale.
The name of witwall or woodwale was loosely given to various birds of a yellow or greenish yellow colour, as the green woodpecker, yellowhammer, oriole, &c. Du. weedewael, geelgorse, galgulus, galbula, chlorion, icterus, avis lurida, vulgo oriolus et widewallus; avis lutei coloris. Germ. wittewal, widdewael, Ang. widdewol.—Kil. The synonym geelgorse is explained by Kil. emberiza flava, galgulus, curruca, the last of which was used as a term for a cuckold. Curruca est avis, vel ille qui cum credat nutrire filios suos nutrit alienos.—Dief. Supp. Curruca, adulteræ maritus.—Kil. in v. Hanne. The origin of this designation is undoubtedly from the fact that the bird known under the name of curruca is one of those in the nest of which the cuckoo drops its egg. Now although with us the nest of the hedge-sparrow is most usually selected for that purpose, yet the yellowhammer and the greenfinch are mentioned by Bewicke as foster-nurses of the cuckoo's egg. A slovenly pronunciation converted witwal into wittal or wittol. ' Godano, a wittal or woodwale.'—Fl. Wittal, like Mid.Lat. curruca, was then used in the sense of a cuckold, especially one who winked at his wife's offence. Wittal, becco contento.—Torriano. When the use of the word as the name of a bird became obsolete, it was supposed to be derived from AS. witol, wittol, sciens, sapiens, as intimating that the husband was witting of his own disgrace. Nor was it only in English that the name of the bird, in whose nest the cuckoo was supposed to lay, became a term of reproach. The Fr. oriole or oriot is rendered by Cot. a heigkaw or witwall, the first of which is obviously identical with Picard huyau (verdon), a yellowhammer or greenfinch, and huyau, like wittal, was used in the sense of cuckold.
Ici git Nicolas Thuyau Qui de trois femmes fut huyau.—Hécart.
I have little doubt that the G. hahnrei, which is quite unexplained, will be found to be a local name of the hedge-sparrow or some such bird.
The yellow colour of the bird is indicated by the first half of the name, Du. weede, glastum, isatis, luteum.—Kil. It. guado, woad to dye blue with: some use it for dyer's weed, some possibly call it wad, any greening weed to dye yellow with.—Fl. Fr. gaude, the stalk of a plant wherewith dyers make their clothes yellow; dyer's weed, greening weed.—Cot.
Wizard. A conjurer or diviner is called among the vulgar the wise or the cunning man, and in like manner from Gael. fios (radically identical with E. wise), knowledge, is fiosach, skilful; fiosachd, sorcery, divination, fortune-telling. Russ. vjedat', to know; vjedan', a soothsayer.
Wizen. Shrivelled, dried up. ON. visinn. Da. wissen, Sw. wisten, wissnad, dried up, withered; wistna, wissna, to fade, lose freshness.
The word is to be explained from ON. vera (anciently vesa or visa—Jonsson), to endure, remain, be, as signifying what has past its time, what has been too long kept, in accordance with Fr. passer, to go by, also to fade, decay, or wither. G. wesen, existence; verwesen (properly to pass away, to wear away), to moulder away, to decay; verwesen, verweset, rotten, decayed. Sanscr. vas, to dwell, continue; what has continued too long, stale. Goth. visan, to be, to dwell. ' Inuh thamma garda visaith' : in illa domo manete.—Luc. 10. 7. From the primary form visan or visa is formed ON. vist, residence, continuance in a place; heimvist, duration of life, continuance in the world; Sw. hemwist, dwelling-place; wistande, residence, sojourn; wistas, to sojourn or reside; wisten, faded, withered.
Wo.—Woe. The deep-drawn breath of severe pain is represented by an interjection which is written in Gr. ouai, oi, Lat. væ, vah, hei, heu, Illyrian vai, Let. wai, Magy. jaj, W. gwae, It. guai, ON. vei, G. weh, wehe, AS. wa.
The interjection was frequently joined with the personal pronoun, as in Lat. hei mihi! Gr. oimoi! Let. waiman! Illyr., vaime! OE. wumme! ' Wumme! lefdi quath he tha : wa is me mine lifes!'—Cockayne, St Marherite, 47. b. 21.
Again, the same principle which leads us to imitate the cry of a cow or a sheep, when we wish to make our hearer think of those animals, or, in other words, the principle which leads us to signify a cow or a sheep by a representation of their cry, leads also to an imitation of the groan of pain when we wish to make our hearer think of a person in pain, which is the first step towards the conception of pain in the abstract. Hence the almost universal use of the interjection representing a groan, with or without grammatical additions, in the sense of pain, suffering, whether bodily or mental, sorrow, grief. Thus we have Let. wail, alas; wnida, pain, sorrow. Illyrian vat, Magy. jaj, W. gwae, AS. wa, are used not only as interjections but also in the sense of pain, sorrow, misfortune, woe. G. kopfweh, zahnweh, headache, toothache; wehe thun, to cause pain; wehmuth, pain, sorrow, anguish.

Wo! Woh! An interjection used to make horses stop, whence wo, stop, check; 'there is no wo in him,' 'he knows no wo.' In the same way ho! was used as an interjection to make one stop, as well in Fr. as in E., and afterwards in the sense of stop or limit: Out of all ho, there is no ho with him, he is not to be restrained.—Nares. 'Some be interjections betokening warnyng to cease. Ho! as, Ho! de par le diable ho! and, Hola!, c'est assez.'—Palsgr.

Why woh! or ho! should be used for the foregoing purpose may perhaps be explained by Fin. woh! used to represent the sound of panting. Woh! woh! vox moleste anhelantis; wohhata, wohkaella, vocem woh edo, inde moleste anhelo. The sense of coming to rest cannot better be signified than by imitating the panting of one who is out of breath from violent exertion. Fin. hohoa, to blow; hohotella, hohdella, hoikata, to pant; huowata, to groan, sigh, pant, take breath, rest from labour.

Woad. OHG. weit, G. waido, It. guado, Fr. guesde.

Wold. A down or champaign ground, hilly and void of wood.—B. The proper meaning seems to be the grassy surface of the ground. ON. völlr, ground, earth, field; O Da. vold, field; now, mound, rampart, dike; Sw. wall, rampart, dike, field, grassy surface of the ground, pasture; walla sig, to become covered with turf; walla, gå i wall, to lead cattle to pasture; wigwall, field of battle; kirkiawall, churchyard. W.E. velling, getting turf up for burning.—Hal. 'The green welle.' greensward.—Sir Gawaine. Sc. fail, turf; Gael. fál, a wall, hedge, sod.

Wolf. Goth. vulfs, ON. ulfr, Lat. lupus. Then with a final k instead of p,

WOOL Lith. wilkas, Slav. wilk, wulk, Serv. vuk, Gr. λύκος.

Woman. See Wife.

Womb. Goth. vamba, AS. wamb, ON. vömb, belly, womb. The name seems applicable in the first instance to any hanging or swagging part of the body, as a dewlap, the belly, the udder, from MHG. wappen, G. schwappen, to wag or swag; Du. wapperen, pendere.—Kil.; E. wabble, wamble. Thus we have MHG. wappe, wamme, palear; Bav. wamben, wampen, wampl, the belly of beasts, and contemptuously, of man; G. wampe, wamme, dewlap, double-chin, paunch; wampig, gorbellied; moswampen, a quag or quaking moss; OHG. milichwäppel, milichwämpel (Schm.), MHG. milchwempel, the udder; wembel, ON. vembill, the belly. Sanscr. vama, an udder.

In like manner from Swab. watscheln, to waddle, swag; watschel, a person with a hanging belly.

Wonder. ON. undra, AS. wundrian, OHG. wunteron, G. wundern.

To Won.—Wont. AS. wunian, Du. wonen, G. wohnen, to dwell, persist, continue. ON. vani, Da. vane, custom, use; ON. vanr, Da. van, vant, used or accustomed to, wonned to, wont.

To Woo. To seek a wife. AS. wogan, to woo, to marry. From wiff, wife, the NFris. forms wöwwen, to lie with a woman, to cohabit (beiliegen, beiwohnen).—Bendsen, Nord Fr. Spr. 323. The word even in E. seems formerly to have been used in the coarser sense.

Wytte is trecherie, Love is lecherie, Play is vilenie, And holyday is gloterie.
Old man is skorned, Yonge woman is wowed.
Epigram, Reliq. Antiq. p. 58.

Wood. ON. viðr, Sw. ved, AS. wudu, OHG. witu, Bav. witt, wit, wood. W. gwydd, trees, shrubs, what is made of wood; in composition, of the woods, wild.

Woof. The weft or cross threads in weaving. OHG. weban, pret. wab, to weave. ON. vefa, vრor óƒ, to weave, twine.

Wool. Goth. wulla, ON. ull, Fris. wille. Fin. willa, Russ. wolna, W. gwlan, Gael. olana, wool. Lith. wilna. Let. willa, wilna, Illyr. vuna, Lat. villus, a lock; vellus, a fleece; Gr. οὖλος, woolly; Esthon. wil, wool; willane, wildne, woollen, woolly.

To Wool or Woold. In nautical language, to wind a rope round a mast or spar in a place where it has been fished or scarfed, to wrap a yard round in order to prevent it chafing. East E. woulders, bandages.—Moor. Du. woelen, to move to and fro, to toss or tumble in bed, flutter, struggle, to wind, wrap.—Bomhoff. ' De mast kreeg een krak en moest gewoeld worden :' the mast got a crack and must be woolled or woolded. NFris. wollin, Swiss willen, to wrap round. Our word is probably a contracted form from the type widdle-waddle, signifying motion to and fro, from whence in so many cases we pass to the sense of twisting, winding. To waddle is to sway to and fro in walking ; G. wadeln, wedeln, to wag, waver ; Silesian wudeln, verwudeln, to crumple, tumble, as a tablecloth.—Deutsch. Mundart. vi. 191. Hanover wudeln, to boil, to swarm ; Bav. wüdeln, wüteln (wu'ln, wou'ln), to move to and fro, to stir, to swarm. Northampton wooddled, muffled, wrapped up about the head and neck. The rudiment of the lost d remains in the h of G. wühlen, to move in a confused manner, to root in the ground.

Word. Goth. vaurd (G. wort), word ; andavaurd, answer ; gavaurdi, speech, conversation. Lith. wardas, name ; Lett. wārds, name, word.

Work.—Wright. Goth. vaurkjan, vaurhta, to work, make, do ; hand-uvaurhts, handmade ; vaurstv, work ; vaurstva, a worker. AS. weorc, work, labour, grief, pain ; wyrcan, pret. worhte, to work (pret. wrought) ; OHG. wurcho, wurhto, a labourer ; AS. wyrhta, E. Wright, an artificer ; Gr. ἔργον, work.

World. AS. werold, worold, weorold, Du. wereld, Fris. warl, wrâl, wrâld, wrâdd. Da. verden, G. welt, world. ON. veröld, the universe, world, worldly life, properly the age or life of man, from öld, age, lifetime, course of time ; and ver, Goth. vair, AS. wer, Lat. vir, man. In the same way Lat. sæculum, age, generation, period, was used for the world, a worldly life.

Worm. AS. wyrm, G. wurm, Lat. vermis, worm ; Goth. vaurms, serpent ; ON. ormr, serpent, worm. Sanscr. krmi, a worm ; Lith. kirmis, kirminis, kirmele, worm, caterpillar ; kirmiti, to breed worms ; Let. zirmis, maggot, worm. The origin, like that of weevil, lies in the idea of swarming, being in multifarious movement, crawling. Pl.D. kribbeln, krubbeln, kremelen, krimmeln, krümmeln, to be in multifarious movement, to swarm, boil.

' Idt was daar so vull, dat idt kremeled un wemelde :' it was so full that it swarmed. Up kribbeln (Hanover krimmeln) laten : to let the water boil up. Du. wremelen, to creep ; Da. vrimle, to swarm ; vrimmel, a swarm. In accordance with the derivation it was written wrim in early English— Of fis, of fugel, of wrim, of der.
Story of Genesis (Early E. Text Soc.), 299.
Thorfore hem cam wrimkin [creep-kind, worm-kind] among That hem wel biterlike stong.—Ib. 3895.

Wormwood. AS. wormwyrt, worm-wort, from being good against worms.

To Worry. Du. worghen, to strangle, choke ; worghpeyren, chokepears. G. würgen, to choke, thence to kill, to slaughter. The word is derived from a representation of the gurgling sound made in the throat by a choking person. Fris. wrigia, to rattle in the throat. ' Werther emmant dulget in sin hals thet he wrigiande gunge :' whoso wounds any one in the throat so that he goes rattling. Pl.D. worghalsen, Hanover quurkhalsen, to choke ; E. dial. querk, to grunt, to moan, wherk, to breathe with difficulty ; querken, wherken, to choke.

Worse.—Worst. Goth. vairs, ON. verri, OFris. virra, verra, OHG. wirs, wirsiro, worse. Diefenbach suggests an origin from the idea of turning aside, twisting, as in the case of Lat. perversus, depraved, bad, and of E. wrong. Lith. wertu, werczu, wersti, to bend, turn ; wirsti, to fall down, to change ; Let. vērtīt, to turn, to change.

Worsted. So named from a village near Norwich where worsted stuffs were made.

Wort. I. AS. wyrt, ON. virtr, Pl.D. wört, G. würze, the decoction of barley of which beer is made.
2. OHG. wurz, herba, gramen, olus ; ON. urt, jurt, a plant ; Goth. vaurts, a root ; aurtigards, ON. jurtagardr, MHG. wurzgarte, a kitchen garden. Chaucer calls a cabbage bed a bed of worts.
Both senses of the word may be explained from the notion of boiling. Lith. werru or werdu, wirti, to boil ; alu wirti, to brew ale ; wirtas, boiled, cooked. Russ. varit', Pol. warzyd, to boil, to brew ; W. berwi, to boil ; berwedd, a boiling ; berweddu, to make a decoction, to brew.
The sense of potherbs, vegetables, may be explained from the same source, as signifying what may be boiled for food. Thus from Pol. warzyć, to boil, is formed warzywa, potherbs ; ogrod warzywny, a kitchen garden. Illyr. variti, to boil, to brew beer ; varivo, vegetable, any garden produce that can be boiled for food. So also Magy. fözni, to boil ; főzelék, vegetables.

The ultimate origin of this Slavonic root expressing boiling is doubtless to be found in the sound of boiling. Pol. gwarzyć, to buzz, hum, chatter ; warzyć, to snarl, growl ; wrzeć, to boil ; wrzawa, uproar, din, hubbub. Lith. alaus wirrimas, brewing of ale ; jūru wirrimas, the roaring of the sea.

Worth.—Worship. AS. weorth, price, value, honour, dignity. 'Geseald to miclum wyrthe:' sold for a great price. Gildan wurth: to pay the price. To wurthe, in honorem. Weorthscipe, worthiness, dignity, honour, glory, worship. Biscoplic wurthscipe, episcopal dignity. Weorthscipes wyrthe : worthy of honour. Goth. vairths, worth, price, worthy ; vairthon, to value. OHG. werd, worthy, estimable ; werdsn, to value, to worship, venerate. ON. verd, virdi, worth, price, money ; verðr, worth, of value ; virding, valuation, honour, respect. W. gwerth, price, sale, value; gwerthu, to sell. Bret. gwerz, sale, commerce, retribution, fee. Lith. wertas, worth, worthy, just. Illyrian vredan, worth, of value ; vrediti, to be worth ; vredno, worthy, fitting. Fin. werta, worth, equivalent, comparable with in value, size, quantity. Riksin werta jywia : a rix-dollar's worth of corn. Sen werta, so much ; minka werta, how much. Kouran werta rahaa (koura, the open hand), a handful of money. Ei sen wertaa ole : nemo ei aequalis est ; wertainen, par, aequalis. On sen wertainen, est ei par. Werratoin, unequal, incomparable, excellent. Wertaan, werrata; wertailen, werrailla, to compare one thing with another. Alä koiraa hewoiseen wertaa : do not compare a dog with a horse. Wertaus, comparison, parable, allegory. Esthon. wäärt, worth ; se wäärt ollema, to be of such a value.

Wound. AS. wund, ON. und, a wound ; Goth. vunds, wounded.

Wrack. Crash, ruin. It. fracasso, any manner of rumbling noise, as it were the falling of houses, trees, thunder-claps, any ruinous destruction, wrack, havoc, hurlyburly, breaking to pieces ; fracassare, fraccare, to ruin, wrack, havoc, make a rumbling and ruinous noise.—Fl. Fr. fracas, violent breaches, wracks, destruction, havoc, hurlyburly.—Cot. See Rack.

Wrack.—Sea wrack. See Wreak.

To Wrangle. Da. rangle, to rattle, gingle ; ON. hrang, hraung, noise, disturbance, altercation ; hraungl, noise. N. rangla, to wrangle, dispute. Hesse wrangeln, brangeln, to struggle with, to pull one another about. See Brangle.

To Wrap.—Whap.—Hap. NFris. wrappe, to wrap ; ON. at reifa barn, to swathe an infant. OE. wrappynge or hyllynge, coopercio, involucio ; wappyn or wyndyn abowte yn clothys, involve ; wappynge, happynge or hyllynge, coopertura, coopericio.—Pr. Pm. Goth. bivaibjan, to wrap round. Expressions for the idea of turning or winding round are commonly applied in the first instance to motion to and fro. Thus we have waddle, to sway to and fro, and in Devon, to fold up, to entwine—Hal. ; wooddled, muffled up, wrapped up—Mrs Baker ; swaddle, swathe, to wrap round. In the same way E. wabble, to roll about, MHG. waberen, to move to and fro, Du. wapperen, to dangle, are connected with Goth. bivaibjan, and E. wap above-mentioned ; while Sc. wrabil, warble, warple, to twist or crawl about, to wriggle, Pl.D. wribbeln, to twist between one's fingers (Danneil), lead to Hereford wrobble, to wrap up. In like relation we have Da. dial. vrappe, to waddle like a duck, to struggle along, compared with E. wrap.

Wrath. AS. wrath, wrath, sharp, bitter, fierce, angry. Wrathre thonne wermod: bitterer than wormwood ; wrathe ongeald, dearly pay. Du. wreed, sharp of taste, rough, hard, sour, unfeeling, violent. Wreede wijn, rough, harsh wine. En wreede dood, a violent death. Pl.D. wreed, bitter, austere, fierce. ON. reida, to incense one ; reiði, Sw. wrede, wrath ; Da. vred, angry. We speak of bitter feelings, of being embittered against a person with whom we are angry. The word seems to be taken from the writhing or twisting of the mouth under the influence of a harsh astringent taste, as Du. wrang, sharp, sour, astringent, harsh, from wringen, to twist. Sw. wrida på munnen, to make a wry mouth.

To Wreak. Goth. vrikan, to pursue ; gavrikan, to punish, to revenge ; AS. wrecan, to give effect to, to exert, and elliptically, to revenge, punish. Törn wrecan, to wreak his anger. He gewrecan thohte, he thought to punish. The primitive meaning is to drive, in a physical sense. OSw. wräka, to drive, as to drive sheep. Wráka frán sig, to cast away from him; wráka husfru bort, to put away his wife. Wráka, in an intransitive sense, to drive or wander about. Even in OE. wreke is used in the physical sense. In the directions for keeping the Passover in the Story of Genesis and Exodus, 3148, the Jews are charged to—eten it bred, and non bon breken, And nogt thor of ut huse wreken.—and cast nought thereof out of the house. ON. reka, to cast, to drive, to pursue; to drive a nail, drive before the wind, drive into exile; reka aptr, to repudiate, reject; reka rettar sins, to pursue his rights; reka harma sinna, to wreak his wrongs. Reki, a driver; rekatre, rekaviðr, driftwood. From this last must probably be explained E. wrack, wreke (Hal.), seawrack, Fr. vrac, varech, what is driven up by the sea, seaweed cast on the shore, seaweed.
Wreath. See Writhe.
Wreck. Shipwreck, properly ship-wrack, Lat. naufragium, is the breach or destruction of a ship upon the rocks. Du. wracke, shipwreck, fragments of wreck.—Kil. See Wrack.
Wreckling.—Writling. Wreckling, an unhealthy feeble child.—Brocket. Ruckling, the least of a brood; wretch-ock, the least of a brood of fowls.—Hal. Wraglands [wraglings], misgrown trees that will never prove timber.—B. The least pig of a brood is also often called a writling.
'Besides it causith it to seem scortched and full of knots, yea and to grow like a dwarf or wreckling.'—Holland, Pliny, in R. Da. dial. vraag, vraegling, Fris. wrák, wráker, an ill-formed, undergrown person; wrigge, a monster; wijlde wrigge (Sw. raggen, OE. ragman), the devil.—Epkema. Pl.D. wrak, a poor contemptible creature, either in body or mind; wruuk, a short, knotty block of wood, an ill-grown, dwarfish creature or plant.
The radical meaning may possibly be explained from Pl.D. wraken, wroken, to reject, pronounce bad of its kind; wrak, refuse, faulty. But the more likely origin of the metaphor seems to be from what is shrivelled or wrinkled, as E. shrimp, something small of its kind, from G. schrumpfen, to shrink. So ruckling or wreckling may be explained from ruckle, to rumple; wrockled, wrinkled—Hal.; ON. hrökkva, to pucker, curl; Fris. wracken, wrecken, wricken, wrickje, to WRESTLE twist.—Outzen. The form writling may be explained from E. dial. writhled, withered, properly wrinkled, shrivelled. Fris. wriiten, to turn, twist, wrap.—Kil. Cotgrave explains Fr. grugeons, 'the smallest or most writhen fruit on a tree, writlings.' They are provincially called crinchlings or crinklings in English, from crinkle, to shrink, to rumple. From the same root, crink, a very small child, a crumpling apple.—Hal. On the same principle Da. dial. vremp, a small boy, may be explained from Du. wrempen, to twist the mouth, E. wrimple, wrinkle.
Wren. AS. wrenna, Gael. dreádhan, Ir. drean.
Wrench. A sudden twist, a sprain; to wrench, to force by twisting. 'I wrenche with the bodye, I tourne my bodye asyde: Je me guinche. I wrenche my foot, I put it out of joynt.'—Palsgr. OE. wrench, wrenck, a trick, properly a sharp turn. Du. rancken, rencken, to bend, turn aside; rancke, bending, trick, deceit—Kil.; ranken, to twine.
A nasalised form of the same root with wriggle. Pl.D. wrikken, wrikkeln, to move to and fro, to shake, joggle; Du. verwrikken, to sprain the foot; G. rücken, to shove, move; verrücken, to dislocate, displace, put out of order. Fris. wriga, wrigian, to twist.—Japycx in Outzen. Du. wreycken u't de handen, to wrench out of one's hands.—Kil. See Wring, Wriggle.
To Wrest.—Wrist. To wrest, to twist, turn aside, to force away by twisting. Fris. wridde, wrisse, to writhe, twist—Outzen; Da. vride, to wring, wrest, writhe; vriste, to wrest, wrench. OFris. wriust, riust, wirst, hond'wriust, NFris. wraast, G. dial. riest, riester, wrist, the joint on which the hand turns; OFris. fotwriust. Da. vrist, ankle, the joint on which the foot turns. See Writhe.
To Wrestle. AS. wræstlian, wraxlian, Fris. wraegsiljen, wrakseljen, wragsele, wrassele, Du. wrastelen, wratselen, worstelen, Devon wraxle, Somerset wrasly, to wrestle, to contend by tugging and twisting each other about. The first of the foregoing forms is connected with AS. wrastan, to twist, and E. writhe, wrest, while the second belongs to the same radical form with Pl.D. wraggeln, wrackeln, wriggeln, to work a thing loose by pulling to and fro, to keep in constant movement; wrikken, wrikkeln, to move to and fro, shake, joggle; wrukkeln, to waggle, totter; Fris. wreka, wretsa, to use force to, to wrench.

emmen dysse sylen op breck, ief dora op wretst: ' if any one breaks up this sluice or wrenches up the door.'—Richthofen. OE. rug; to tug, to shake; E. dial. ruckle, to struggle.—Hal. See Wriggle.
Wretch. — Wretched. AS. wracca, wrecca, an exile, and thence a wretch, a miserable man. Wineleas wracca, a friendless exile. Swithe earme wreccan, very miserable exiles. The same train of thought is seen in G. wrack, a foreign land, exile, and thence misery, wretchedness. See Wreak.
To Wriggle. Pl.D. wraggeln, wriggeln, wrackeln (Danneil), wrikken, wrikkeln, rikkrakken (Brem. Wtb.), to work a thing loose by wriggling or shaking to and fro; wrikken, to scull a boat. 'Du bist j'n wriggel-wraggel,' you are never still.—Danneil. E. dial. to wraggle on, to struggle with difficulties. The table wrigs; the child's allus wrigging about.—Mrs Baker. OE. roggyn or mevyn, agito.—Pr. Pm. E. dial. to roggle, rogge, to shake; to ruggle about, to stir about. Sc. rug, a rough hasty pull. Bav. rogel, roglich, loose, shaking. Der zahn wird rogel, the tooth is loose; rigeln, to stir, to shake; rigelsam, stirring, active. G. regen, to move, to stir. N. rugga. Da. rokke, to rock or vacillate.

It is a common train of thought to apply a root representing rattling or rumbling sound to signify jolting or rolling movement, and thence a rugged or wrinkled surface. Thus we refer the present word to forms like Du. rabbeln, G. rappeln, to rattle; rumpeln, rummeln, Du. rammeln, to rumble, rattle. See Rumple.
To Wring. To press or squeeze hard, to pinch or gripe, to put to pain.—B. AS. win wringan, to press wine; E. cheese-wring, a cheese-press. The proper sense is to twist. Pl.D. sik wringen as een wurm, to twist like a worm; wringen-im live, pains in the bowels. Da. vringel, twisting; vringle, to twist, tangle; vrænge, to twist. G. ringen, to wring, wriggle, wrest, twist, wrestle. Sich wie ein wurm ringen, to wriggle like a worm. A nasalised form corresponding to wrig, wriggle, as G. wankeln to E. waggle, or as wamble to wabble, &c.
Wrinkle. Du. wronck, wronckel, a twisting, a wreath, a wrinkle; wronckelen, wrinckelen, to twist, curl, wrinkle; kronckelen, to curl, twist, crook, bend; kronckel-wronckel, sinuous, twisting, curly-whirly.
Formed in the manner explained under Wrimple, from a somewhat different representation of a rattling or clattering sound. Da. rangle, to rattle; E. wrangle, to jangle or keep making an importunate noise; ON. hröngl, noise, rumbling; hrang, wrangling, altercation; hringla, to tinkle. Then passing from sound to movement. Da. dial. vrangle, vringle, vrængle, to go unevenly, to move in a halting or hobbling way; vringlet, crooked, twisted, crabbed in disposition. Sw. runka, to vacillate, jog, shake; rynke, a pleat, pucker, fold, wrinkle.
The same relation between a broken sound and a rugged or wrinkled surface is shown in E. dial. rackle, rucket, to rattle; ruggle, a child's rattle; N. rukla, G. röcheln, to rattle in the throat, and ON. hrucka, a pleat, wrinkle; hruckottr, rugged, wrinkled; E. dial. wrockled, wrinkled.

Wright. An artificer. AS. wyrcean, worhte, to work; wyrhta, a maker, worker. Ealra gesceafta wyrhta, the Creator of all things. Se wyrhta ys wyrthe hys metys, the labourer is worthy of his hire.
Wrimple. 'Rider, to wrinkle or to wrimple; rides, crumples, wrimples, folds, plaits.'—Cot. Du. wrempen, wrimpen (Kil.), G. rümpfen, to wry the mouth; Bav. rimpfen, to twist as a worm, to shrink or crumple. Cumberland wramp, a sprain; Da. dial. wrimp, a little boy (a shrimp); AS. hrympelle, Du. rimpe, rimpel, rompel (Kil.), a wrinkle, fold; E. rimple, rumple, to wrinkle, tumble, throw into irregular folds.

To Write. ON. writa, to write; rista. Da. riste, ridse, to score, cut, scratch. Hann ristr mikla ristu, he scratched a deep score; rista runir, stafi, to carve runes, letters. Sw. rita, ritsa, to draw, trace, design; rista, to score, engrave. Pl.D. riten, to draw, to make strokes, to tear, to split.
That Lat. scribere also takes its meaning from the notion of scratching is shown by Gael. sgriobh, write ; sgriob, scrape; scratch, draw lines ; sgriobair, a graving tool. So also Let. rakt, to engrave, to carve; rakstiht, to write, to draw ; Lith. raszyti, to write ; reszti, to cut, score, tear.
The ultimate origin is a representation of the sound made in scratching or tearing. Pl.D. ritsch ! ratsch ! imitation of the sound a thing makes in tearing.—Danneil.
To Writhe.—Wry. Da. vride, vrie, Sw. wrida, to wring or twist ; wrida ur led, to dislocate a joint. Da. vridig, pliable ; Ditm. wriddel (Brem. Wtb.), a wreath of clouts ; Da. vrilde, vrid, vrile, a wisp of hay, so much as is twisted up together ; vreden, half sour, turned, of wine or beer. Du. wreed, sour, harsh, rough.
The train of thought is probably, as in so many other cases, to rattle, to move to and fro, then to turn round, to twist. Sw. rodeln, rotteln, to be loose and shaky, to stir liquids ; roden, to stir, to move ; Bav. rodeln, rudeln, to shake, stir, roll ; raden, reden, to riddle or sieve ; reiden, to turn, twist, plait ; ridel, a wreath, tress, plait, wisp ; E. dial. rudder, riddle, a sieve, an implement worked by shaking to and fro. Bret. rodella, to roll, to curl. Du. wraddel, a dewlap, from its swaying to and fro. Fris. wridde, wrisse, to rub or turn to and fro, to twist, to crook.
It is remarkable that the groups of words expressing ideas connected with vacillating or rolling movement, clustered round the forms wabble, waddle, waggle, are mostly accompanied by parallel forms in which an r is inserted after the initial w. Thus in the first class are E. wrap and wrobble, as well as wap, to envelop or cover up ; Pl.D. wribbeln, to rub between the fingers, to twiddle, parallel with G. wibbeln, wiebeln, to be in multifarious movement, to crawl ; Da. vrimle, with G. wimmeln, to swarm ; Du. wrijven, G. reiben, to rub, with E. wipe.
In the second class are Du. wraddel, a dewlap, the dangling skin under the throat of an ox, parallel with E. waddles or wattles, the dangling flesh under the throat of a cock, and probably with G. wade, the calf or fleshy part of the leg ; E. writhe, Da. vride, parallel with Goth. vidan, vithan, to bind, Sc. widdle, to move in and out, E. widdy-waddy [moving to and fro], trifling, insignificant—Hal. ; Da. vridig, pliant, parallel with E. withy, a pliant rod.
In the third class we have Pl.D. wrigel-wragel as well as wigel-wagel, expressing vacillation ; E. wriggle, parallel with wiggle, to reel or stagger—Hal. ; wrench and winch, to twist, to turn aside.
Wrong. What is wrung or turned aside from the right or straight way to the desired end. Moral right and wrong are the right or wrong means to satisfy the conscience. Da. vrænge, to twist ; vrang, wrong ; ON. rangr, wry, crooked, unjust. In like manner Fr. droit (directus), straight, right ; tort (from tordre, to twist), wrong. w. cam, crooked, wrong, false.
Wry. A degraded form of writhe. The Da. vride, to writhe, is pronounced vrie (Bosworth), and the participle vreden (of ale), sourish, turned, vreien.—Molbech.

Yacht. Du. jaght-schip, jaghte, a light ship, fit to give chase with, from jaght, chase ; jaghten, to chase, to hurry, hasten ; jaghtigh, venaticus, valde celer, festinus ; jaghen, to hunt, and met. to hasten.—Kil.
Yard. 1. AS. geard, gyrd, G. gerte, a rod, wand, switch, a pole or perch, a measuring rod ; bindgerte, an osier or withy ; Bav. gart, garten, a twig, rod ; ettergarten, rods for hedging ; birkene gartn, a birch rod ; gert, a rod or pole, a measure for land. Du. gaerde, gheerde, virga, flagrum, scipio, stimulus.—Kil.
Lith. karte, kartis, a pole, rod ; apwyn karte, a hop-pole. Boh. zerd, Pol. zerdz, Russ. zerd', pole.
2. In the next place, probably from rods or wattlework affording the readiest means of making fences, ON. gardr, gerdi, a fence, hedge, anything inclosed within a fence, a house, yard, court, garden ; gerda, girda, to inclose, to fence. Dan. gjerde, a fence ; gaard, a house, a farm. AS. geard, an inclosure ; NE. garth, a yard, small field or inclosure, orchard, garden. Bav. holzgarten, the woodyard ; hopfengarten, hop-garden ; weingarten, vineyard. Bret. garz, a hedge, a garden; W. gardd, a yard, garden. Illyr. graditi, to fence, wall, build; gradina, a hedge, garden.
Yare. Ready, quick, expeditious.—B. AS. gearo, gearw, ready, prepared; G. gar, ready, complete, altogether. Der Fisch ist gar, the fish is done enough, is cooked. Das Leder gar machen, to pre-pare leather, to tan.
Yarn. ON., G. garn, Du. garen, gaeren, yarn, thread.
Yawl. Gael. geola, a ship's boat; Sw. julle, Da. jolle, a yawl, jolly boat; jolle, to row.
To Yawl. To cry, to howl.—Hal. G. dial. julen, jolen, jaueln, Swiss jaulen, jauren, jauseln, to lament, wail, whimper; ON. gola, to howl. Illyr. jao! alas; jao-kati, to cry jao!, to lament. Lat. heu! eu! alas; ejulare, to cry eu, eheu, to lament.
To Yawn. AS. geonian, gynian, OHG. ginon, geinon,—ON. gina, Gr. χάινω, to gape, yawn.
Yea.—Yes. AS. gea, and (in composi-tion with se) gese, yea, yes, as ne, nese, nay, no. Goth., G., Du. ja, yes. Illyr. je, is. The meaning of yea would seem to be, it is so.
To Yean, Ean. AS. eanian, parturire, eniti; eanigend, foetans; eanod, enixus.—Lye. Geeane, (of sheep) in lamb; geeane eowa, foetas oves.—Gen. 33. 13. Plausibly explained as a corruption of eacnian, geeacnian, to increase, conceive, bring forth. But it does not appear that eanian, geeanian, is ever used of any other animals besides sheep, and a far more probable origin may be found in W. oen, Gael. uan, Manx eayn, a lamb; eay-ney, to yean, to lamb.
Year. Goth. jâr, G. jahr, ON. âr.
To Yearn, Earn. Properly to shiver with desire or other emotion, as a dog may be seen to do when he is intently watching his master eating, and yearns for a morsel of the coveted food. 'Fris-soner, to tremble, shiver, earn through cold or fear.'—Cot. Torriano explains to earn (within), sviscerarsi, tremar di freddo, raccapricciarsi (to shiver with cold, the hair to stand on end); to yearn, arricci-arsi; a yearning (through sudden fear), arricciamento. ON. giarn, desirous; girna, to desire. 'A child is said to girn when it becomes peevish from earnest desire of any object.'—Jam. Sophocles has ἔφριξ᾽ ἔρωτι, I shivered with love. Alban. λαχταρίζ, I shiver, tremble, earn-estly desire.
Yeast. The froth in the working of new beer.—B. Swiss jast, G. gäscht, froth of beer, yeast. Swiss jäsen, G. gäschen, to froth or foam, to lather. Beer gäscht when it ferments or frets, but still more when it is poured into a glass and raises a hissing froth.—Kütn. From the hissing noise of fermentation yeast is called sizzing in the S. of E.—Ray. And the word yeast probably arises from an imitation of the same sound. ON. jastr, the rustling of leaves, sound of trees in a storm (Haldorsen), yeast, scum on sour milk (Jonsson); gjosa, to spirt, gush forth with a whizzing noise; AS. gist, a blast of wind, yeast; yst, a tempest, storm. Micel yst windes, a great storm of wind.—Mark 4. 37. Ystig, stormy, may be compared with Shakespear's 'yesty waves.'
Yelk.—Yolk. AS. geolca, gioleca, the yellow of an egg. Bohem. zluty, yellow; zlautek, yolk; zlautenice, jaundice, the yellow disease; Pol. zolty, yellow; zoltek, yolk.
Yell. AS. gyllan, giellan, ON. gella, gjalla, to yell, shriek, ring, resound; Du. ghillen, to creak, squeak, scream; ghil-linge van de sage, the creaking of a saw.—Kil. G. gellen, to tingle; Sw. gälla, to resound.
Yellow. AS. gelew, geoluwe, G. gelb, ON. gulr, Lat. galbus, gilkus, gilvus, hel-vus, fulvus, flavus. It. giallo, Sp. jalde, Ptg. jalde, jalne, Fr. jaune, Pol. zolty. Boh. zluty, yellow. There can be little doubt that the word is connected with Gold, Gall, Yelk or Yolk. Boh. zlato, Pol. zloto, gold; Boh. zlud, Gr. χολή, gall, bile. Lat. fel, gall, may be compared with flavus, fulvus. Russ. zelt', yellow; zelch', gall, bile; zel-tok, yelk of an egg.
To Yelp. ON. gjalfr, noise, yelping of dogs, dashing of waves; gjalpa, to roar like the waves, to dash; Fr. glapir, to bark like a dog, yelp, yawl, brawl.—Cot.
Yeoman. Rightly explained by Spel-man from Goth. gavi, OHG. gewi, gouwi, G. gau, gai, ge, Fris. goo, gae, district, country, place, village, whence OHG. gou-lih, gawisc, rural, rustic. The primary meaning of the word would thus be a countryman. Fris. gaeman, gaemon, villager, village inhabitants; gaekercke, village church; gaelioed, gaefolc, parish-ioners, village people.—Richthofen. The word then is quite unconnected with the gam of G. bräutigam, or with AS. guma, a man.
Yes. See Yea.

Yesterday, AS. gyrstandæg, gestran-dæg, geosterlic, yesterday; Du. gister, gisteren, G. gestern, yesterday; Lat. heri, hesternus; Gr. χθές, χθιζός, Sanscr. hyas, hyastana.
Yet. AS. gyt, W. etto, yet, still, again. Gr. ἔτι, yet.
Yew. Pl.D. ibe, ive, G. eibe, Fr. if, W. yw, Sw. id.
To Yield. AS. gyldan, geldan, to re-store, repay, pay, give back, give up. Sw. gälda, to compensate, pay, satisfy; gäld, debt. ON. gjalda, to pay; gjald, gjöld, payment, satisfaction. Goth. gildan, to recompense, requite. See Guilt.
Yoke. Goth. juk, ON. ok, G. joch, Lith. jùngas, the yoke or implement by which a pair of oxen are joined together for the purpose of drawing a plough or waggon.
The name is taken from the verb signifying to join. Thus Sanscr. yuj, join; yuga, a yoke, a pair; Gr. ζευγνύναι, to join; ζυγόν, ζεύγος, a yoke; Lat. jungere, to join, jugum, Fr. Joug, a yoke.
Yon.—Yonder. AS. geond, thither, beyond, yonder. Hither and geond, hither and thither. Geond feowertig daga, after forty days. Geond drige stowa, through dry places. Goth. jains, that; jainar, there; jaind, jaindwairths, jaindre, thither; jainthro, from thence; ON. enn, inn, hinn, that one, the; Du. ginds, ginder, yon, yonder.
Yore. Heretofore, anciently.—B. AS. geara, gearwe, gere, formerly, for a long time; geara nu, jamdudum; gearage-wuned, long used, inveterate; geardaga, ancient days, days of yore. Geara was also used in the sense of thoroughly, perfectly. Hi wiston geare (Luk. 20. 6), they were persuaded. Gearwe cuthe, I well knew. In the latter sense, at least, it is impossible to doubt that the word is identical with G. gar, OHG. garo, garawo, thoroughly, altogether, complete. Garo ni wizzanto, penitus ignorantes. Now the G. adverb is from OHG. garo, garaw, AS. gearo, gearu, yare, ready, while the idea of readiness passes easily into that of complete, accomplished, passed, long gone by. Es sind noch nicht gar vier wochen: it is not full four weeks, four weeks are not yet completely gone since, &c. Gar selten, quite seldom. The notion of readiness is in like manner used to signify time completely passed, in the adverb already. Where it is said in the Acts that 'sailing was now dangerous because the feast was now already past,' it means that the feast was some time past. And precisely as now is joined in the foregoing passage with already, the AS. geo, now, was joined with geara; geo ær, geo geara, geo hwilum, now already, long ago.
Young.—Youth. Goth. juggs, com-parative, juhiza, young; yunda, youth; AS. geong, G. jung, young; geogothe, G. jugend, youth. Sanscr. yuvan, Lat. juvenis, Lith. jaunas, W. ieuancg, young.
Yule. The name of the Christmas festival among the Scandinavians and connected races; ON. jól, Fin. joulu, Esthon. joulo: In English the name is nearly confined to Scotland and the Northern counties, where the language was chiefly open to Scandinavian in-fluences. The ON. jól signified not merely the Christmas festival' but a feast in general. Hugins jól, skólkynis jól, the crow's, wolf's feast; battle, slaughter. It is however doubtful whether the name of the principal feast of the year has been generalised, or whether the word once signifying feast in general has been in course of time restricted to the Midwinter festival. On the supposition that the primary signification is a feast it has been connected with W. gwyll, Bret. gouil, a feast. Bede seems to regard the name of Yule as equivalent to G. sonnenwende (sunturn), the winter solstice, when the sun turns from the shortening to the lengthening of the day. In the AS. calendar the months of December and January, on either side of the solstice, were called ærre-geola and æftera-geola, the former and the latter Yule, and of these Bede says, 'Menses Giuli a conversione solis in auctum diei, quia unus eorum præcedit, alius subsequitur, nomina acceperunt.'—De temporum ratione, c. 13. The author of the Menologium Anglosaxoni-cum takes a similar view, 'Duo sunt menses qui uno nomine gaudent; alter Geola prior, alter posterior est. Eorum enim alter præcedit solem priusquam convertat se ad longitudinem diei, alter subsequitur.'
The connection between the AS. geohol and the sense of turning is not apparent to us, but it has been explained from W. chwyl, a turn; AS. hwiol, ON. hjúl, a wheel.

Zany. Zane, the name of John in some parts of Lombardy, but commonly taken for a silly John, or foolish clown in a play, as a Jack-pudding at the dancing of the ropes.—Fl.

Zeal.—Zealot. Gr. Ζῆλος, emulation, eager pursuit of, or ardour after, a thing, whence ζηλωτής.

Zenith. Said to be a corruption of Arab. semt, quarter, region ; semt-ar-rās, Turk. semt-i-resst, the head region, the zenith ; semt-i-kadem, the foot region, the nadir. The word nadir signifies what is opposite (viz. to the zenith), from Arab. nazar, look. A circle from the zenith to the horizon was in Arab. called alsemt, the zenith circle, whence our Azimuth.—Dict. Etym.

Zephyr. Gr. Ζέφυρος, the west wind.

Zero. There is little doubt that this word must have come to us with the Arabic notation, of which it is the characteristic feature. In Arabic however it is marked by a dot or dash, and not by a circle. It is in vain to attempt to identify it with cypher, as is often done. Possibly it may be the Arabic zar' (or if we mark the ain by an o, zaro), a seed, as we speak of the pips or dots by which the numbers are marked on dice.

Zest. Fr. zest, the inner skin of a walnut, which is taken as a type of a worthless trifle. Il ne vaut pas un zest, he is not worth a rush. Possibly the second may be the primary meaning of the word. Zest is also used to express the sound made by a jerk, yark, stripe, thwack, &c.—Cot. In E. it signified a piece of lemon-peel put in to flavour drink, and thence was used for relish, flavour. Lat. ciccum, the soft skin surrounding the pips of a pomegranate ; met. a trifle.

Zigzag. G. zickzack, Fr. zigzag, Pol. zygzag. Commonly called an onomatopoeia, and rightly so if by that name is meant an attempt directly to represent the thing signified by means of the voice. But we need not suppose that it is an imitation of the sound made by any zigzag action, as it may be a case of mere analogy between the effort of utterance and the kind of effort in zigzag action. It is peculiar to the mutes b, d, g, p, t, k, that the breath is completely stopped in their utterance, whence they are called by Max Müller, checks. Hence a short syllable ending in one of these consonants is frequently used to represent a sharp movement abruptly checked. Thus we have dig, dag, jig, jag, jog, Fr. sag-oter, to jog ; sac-cade, a rough and sudden jerk or check—Sadler, Fr. Dict. choc, a shock ; Pl.D. stik, a syllable by which is expressed a jog or jolt in riding or driving, and which (says the Brem. Wtb.) expresses by the sound the thing itself. Of a ride on a jolting horse it is said, dat geit jummer suksuk! that goes suk! suk! Sukkeln, suksen, to go jolting along. In zig! zag! each syllable represents a sharp movement abruptly checked, while the change of vowel from i to a indicates the change in the direction of the movement. Of course no one pretends that the mere utterance would be sufficient to convey so much meaning to a person who heard it for the first time, but the utterance would in the first instance be accompanied and explained by a zigzag movement of the hand.

Zodiac. Gr. Ζωδιακός, the epithet of the circle inscribed with the twelve signs, or constellations so called.

Zone. Gr. Ζώνη, a girdle.

Zoo-. Ζωο-, from ζωή, life.

Zymotic. Gr. ζυμωτικός, having the property of promoting fermentation, or of leavening ; ζύμη, leaven.
